we basically live in a simulation that's
created by our Biology one of the most
troubling glitches in that Matrix is
depression you're an intersection of
something that I think is really
important with transcranial magnetic
stimulation and psychedelics what's
happening what causes depression if you
take somebody and you stress them in the
scanner and you cause them to have this
what they call social defeat stress
right where you make them feel like they
you know have this inability to control
you know the external world this
inability to this kind of sense or
feeling of kind of social defeat in
front of others that sort of thing then
a certain brain region will go offline
what brain region is called the left or
cilateral prefrontal cortex so that's
the region that's involved in control
and perceptions of control control or
perceptions of control
yeah perceptions of control that brain
region goes offline
and you know the idea is that if you
accumulate enough of that you're sending
a signal into the system that basically
trains a system like a memory to keep
that system offline how are you knocking
that out in the first place is that
where we're using transcranial magnetic
stimulation no so it's um it's
essentially this idea that you know
external stimuli you know feelings of
loss of control feelings you know social
humiliation whatever it is so you
humiliate them while they're in the
machine I don't I don't but there have
been studies that uh the folks have done
that right really use social defeat
stressors and different
through different tasks or watching
videos you can make you can induce
sadness and normal healthy controls so I
could put you in the scanner and make
you experience Sadness by playing like
some of the you know most sadness
inducing you know movies
um that that people have ever seen so
you can there are experimental ways of
manipulating emotions even normal
healthy controls you can do it in people
with illness and you can accentuate it
right you can make folks
experience more symptoms even than their
Baseline say depressive symptoms and
those are ways of moving this network
around and then understanding what it is
so we've been doing that for a long time
you know since the mid 90s one of my my
mentor that developed the original
transcranial magnetic stimulation
approach was doing experiments in at the
National Institute of Mental Health in
the mid 90s and they were doing these
sorts of emotional manipulation sadness
induction sorts of manipulations and so
you can take somebody who's not sad you
can make them sad and then another brain
region comes online that's called the
sub-genial anterior cingulate so the
left or lateral is kind of like right at
the edge of your eyebrow go all the way
up to you know in the natural hairline
and that's about where that is the
subgenial anterior cingulate is more in
the kind of midline of the brain it's
under the corpus callosum
so it kind of sits
um you know more kind of behind my two
fingers here and that region will come
online during sadness and you know in
depressed individuals kind of stay
online
and so you know the the dynamic between
those two brain regions normally is and
it's this is a simplification this is
more regions that are involved but you
know the core of it
is the left or scholateral clamps down
on the subgenial anterior cingulate in
the case of mood regulation there are
other parts of the dorsolateral that'll
clamp down on the in other parts of the
cingulate for cognitive control like
pure cognitive control but essentially
those two brain networks those two brain
regions within you know Associated brain
Networks
are involved in this this Dynamic of
control and if your external environment
is such that it essentially trains
through kind of a essentially a memory
process these systems to be
pathologically in the case of
dorsolateral turned down in the case is
sub-genial turned up then it makes the
individual much more likely to have a
depressive episode and much more likely
to stay in a depressive episode and so
we know from many different you know
kind of epidemic epidemiological studies
that folks with early life trauma so
they've had you know abuse you have
physical abuse sexual emotional abuse as
a kid they're much more likely to you
know experience depression and have
harder to treat depression we call
treatment resistant depression right and
so it's like those early life
experiences wire and
a certain risk within this network the
good thing to kind of get to our you
know your question earlier in our
research is that we're able to with
stimulation reverse that Dynamic and
we're able to do it
not just with depression but we can
actually move around perceive control
phenomenon in other parts of the
dorsolateral cingulate combination so
we've been able to there's a paper
coming out soon where we were able to
move around trade hypnotizability make
people more likely to suggestion when
you say move around you're saying
increase by altering what brain regions
or online or offline or active or
inactive
so interesting okay so I I really try to
convey to people a very simple notion
you are having a biological experience
I've said a thousand times if there's
going to be an Epitaph on My Grave I
would want it to be that just a reminder
to people that ultimately you exist
inside of this simulation is a cool way
to say it but your your brain one light
never touches your brain and even if it
did the portion of the Electoral
magnetic spectrum that we perceive as
like one millionth of what is actually
there so the the thing that we think of
as everything is this tiny tiny tiny
tiny tiny fraction of what's actually
there and so in confusing your
perception for reality you don't realize
how much your brain is basically
communicating to you to say oh this
thing is bad or this thing is good not
necessarily objectively bad or good and
for me the the big breakthrough in my my
life came when I realized oh wow all
everything that I'm worried about not
being able to achieve in my life is
comes down to brain plasticity can I get
better yes or no if I can get better
then it's just about applying as much
energy as I can do we have limits of
course and are all of our limits
different yes but at least focusing on
that and so getting into the brain
science of how this actually worked
ended up unlocking literally the rest of
my life so when I try to explain to
people and start Rich successful didn't
have entrepreneur parents nothing I I
started behind the eight ball as far as
I'm concerned not look many people had
it worse but I was not primed for the
kind of success that I ended up having
and when I look at why it really does
trace back to the moment I decided to
understand how the brain worked and that
allowed me to start pulling whatever
levers I could which you know 25 years
ago when I really started thinking about
this there weren't as many levers to
pull on but now as we start looking at
things like this it gets pretty
interesting so one thing that I try to
communicate to people is you be become
what you repeat now I have a thesis on
this that you as somebody who knows is
far better than I want wherever I go
wrong let me know your brain is just a
caloric hog it it's just gobbling up
resources from an evolutionary
standpoint resources in the form of
calories were very hard to come by so
your brain was like all right look if
you're gonna do anything a lot I'm gonna
optimize that through a process called
myelination and I'm going to wrap fatty
tissue around the neurons that you fire
in groups a lot and so those networks I
think if I were going to use your
language I would say circuits begin to
form of these interconnected neurons
where clusters whether it's
depression-like symptoms oh you think
this depressive thing a lot and so this
brain region lights up this other one
goes quiet I'm going to make that easier
I'm going to almost make that your
default and so because I have made the
communication between those neurons
Easier by myelinating them now that it
just takes less caloric resources so now
the state of being depression becomes
the easiest calorically state for you to
be in and that's how people end up just
you repeat your way to Joy misery
whatever yes totally and um you know
there's a kind of an old Neuroscience
saying what what uh fires together wires
together which is essentially what you
just said right and so the one caveat I
think that I put in there is for a lot
of folks you know especially the early
life trauma folks it's it's less they're
they're not in a place developmentally
if they're a kid or their their
cognitions are such that they even
recognize that is that part of the
problem they don't have a defense uh uh
sort of thought-based defense mechanism
to re contextualize sometimes they don't
know what's what's abnormal and normal I
mean if you're talking about a
seven-year-old you know or a
five-year-old it's hard right it's hard
to have that level of context but yet
they're exposed to these events that
create perceptions of not having control
that are probably you know in that
setting accurate right if you're you
know if you're if it's a kid
experiencing some sort of abuse you know
they don't have
they don't have control you know and so
that's why you know it kind of sets
those some of those individuals up you
know for future you know psychiatric
illness some of those individuals have
you know profound resilience you know
and don't have that problem and we so
there's been a big Focus to try to
understand why some people are resilient
they have these really bad early life
you know trauma
um experiences and then they go on to be
okay even despite all of that others you
know end up having you know a
psychiatric diagnosis like depression
what's cool I think and where you know
we've really focused is this idea that
just as you're pointing out that you can
learn these things you know one way you
know we can actually use
neurostimulation techniques like
non-invasive magnetic stimulation where
people are awake and able to talk and
watch television and all that stuff
while this is going on and you can
actually change you know the the brain
you know connectivity in such a way
where you could re-establish dominance
of the right brain circuitry right you
can turn on areas that you know maybe
have spent you know that individual
spent a long time you know kind of wired
up in a certain way and you can change
it so that they can actually clamp down
um you know say the sadness region and
have control over it and that's been
what's been really striking for me as
we've been doing a lot of these these
experiments is that
you know I have patients all the time
say to me you know I I don't even
understand how I'm able to do this right
now because I've never been able to do
it what's this whatever it is you know I
had a um a patient who told me that she
put her feet on the dashboard of the car
every single time her significant other
would drive her somewhere she was so
afraid of getting in a car accident
scream at him and be really anxious and
really upset and like hated being in the
car
and a couple of days into our you know
really rapid stimulation approach you
know she knew that she was better
because she was like she sat down in the
car she started they started you know
getting ready to go and then the
significant others like you're not going
to put your feet on the dashboard like
this was like literally every time she
get in the car and she's like I guess I
don't need to whoa roll the window down
and like let the wind come in you know
what I mean so it's one of these things
or you know patients who've come to me
after you know receiving their their
week of stimulation and they come in the
next week and they say
you know they told me before they
started like all these psychotherapists
told me I wasn't trying hard enough to
do the Psychotherapy right
and this weekend instead of like going
to the beach or whatever you think they
do now that they're feeling well they
went and spent the weekend like reading
the the cognitive behavioral therapy
workbooks or the mindfulness workbooks
or whatever and they're like yeah I just
like whipped through it in two hours and
did the whole workbook or whatever you
know and you're like you know one like
like how did you do that why did you do
that you know and they're like because I
I knew that I couldn't you know and it
was something kind of inherently not
fully functioning in my brain now that
it is I need to prove to myself that I
could do it which I thought was really
like important and kind of anecdotally I
saw enough of that you know to where it
was like pretty it's been pretty clear
to me
that turning these systems on restores
folks ability to have kind of full
volition and be able to do you know have
real control through choice to your
point and I think
kind of at the experiential level that
is what's you know kind of functionally
wrong with depression you know is in in
the more kind of moderate to severe
states that control is lost you know
there's there's too much kind of
repetitive behavior-based stuff
of avoidance of pain or fear or whatever
it is you know
whoa okay so uh this is very interesting
one thing that I'm particularly
um interested in right now is AI and
I've seen some of the AI
um basically neural feedback setups that
are being developed as you were talking
I was like I have a hunch that what
we're going to find over time is that
this is really patterns of firing in the
brain more than like one region it's
going to be a symphony of things like
there there are times where you want you
know the the anxiety region to be active
and the control center to be low but you
you want those to be appropriate to the
given situation and if I had to guess uh
over time with AI we'll be able to start
matching just like thousands tens of
hundreds of thousands of people in these
devices seeing the different setups that
they're in so we know oh you're trying
to learn right now being in the stressed
out State that's not going to be optimal
for learning you need to get into this
state now if it's like biofeedback so I
used to have a really bad problem with
my it's actually manifesting my scalenes
but it was a mid-back problem which I
never would have guessed once I had a
biofeedback device that would beep at me
when I was firing my mid-back I learned
to control my mid-back and then I could
solve my problem with my scalenes super
weird so I have a feeling it's going to
be similar like if you can learn to
control a region of the brain which I
love saying things like this in front of
people who can tell me if I'm crazy uh
but I can I can actually capture the
sense of Joy or Elation in like little
small bits just by thinking about it by
knowing what it's like and so I can like
put myself in that state I can't take
myself from like I'm legitimately
depressed oh my God I'm on cloud nine
but I can grab these little moments
consciously on purpose and so my hope is
that if you have a device that is able
to track your brain waves and you know
what your target brainwave pattern is
and you can sort of grab you can train
yourself to be in a certain a learning
state or a joyful state or whatever and
one does that sound crazy
yeah so that to me is could be obviously
we'd need data but that could be really
transformational absolutely no I think
the the um
the you know technology kind of device
space within mental health and brain
health it's just you know right that
we're kind of scratching the surface I
mean the tech that we've been developing
to your point is both a location
derivation that's in you know
individualize the person using machine
learning but then also it's
um a pattern of stimulation that in that
case sends a message of turn on stay on
remember to stay on in that brain region
you know and essentially mimicking the
sort of learning that you do with say
note cards right you write out 60 note
cards and you look at it one every
minute or something and you get back to
the first one about an hour later so we
call space learning theory you don't
like just write one out and look at it
50 times and set it down right like
people don't do that they have a stack
of note cards
stimulation can be the same way you
stimulate you give a certain amount of
time for the dendritic spines to enlarge
and Prime and about an hour later you
stimulate again it emulates that same
exposure re-exposure thing that you see
with being exposed to a piece of
information on the note card and then
about an hour later you get back to that
first note card you see it again these
are not different right it's that idea
of being able to kind of lock those
memories in but it's very simplistic
right we don't all we kind of know is we
can turn this system on or off and kind
of send signals in timed patterns to
really reinforce turning it on or
reinforce turning it off but to your
point like ideas around using machine
learning AI to
develop new parameter sets that send
more sophisticated signals send like a
you know Morse code from the from the
stimulation operator into the brain
that's giving actual information
um you know is going to be important and
then to your point also learning how to
pick this stuff up and have behavioral
techniques to reinforce it before you
have to get to a place where you're
putting dense amounts of stimulation to
the brain and we're calling it a
diagnosis right like I think we're only
doing that because we're not good at
picking it up early enough and doing
more preventative stuff so things get to
some you know moment where people are
not doing well and they're in high risk
situation and then we you know and then
we kind of you know jump in and treat
them with these you know Technologies
but my hope is that we figure out a way
to kind of move it back to your point
find less less and less invasive things
that can
train the brain in a way that you don't
you kind of never get there or whatever
you know but you know but that's the
Hope yeah man if that ends up working
out that'll that'll be transformative so
I'm uh I am both terrified of AI and
probably unreasonably optimistic uh I
yeah I there's patterns patterns
everything is patterns and if we can
learn some of those patterns and can can
lock into those patterns in a way that
becomes useful I think this really gets
interesting I think you were just
talking about this but I wouldn't have
known to pick up on it except for the
fact that I've done a lot of research on
you but um you were talking about Morse
code like actually being able to play
back into the brain and one thing I've
heard you talk about is that we can and
I don't know the method by which you do
this but you can basically record
biological patterns for a given State
play that back to the brain in some way
through uh frequency
frequencies and the brain's like oh I
know what to do with that frequency
pattern tell me about that because it if
what you're saying is that a lack of
control and you may hate me putting
these words in your mouth but if if a
lack of control is depression that that
the when you put somebody in the state
where they feel they have no control it
is the setup that leads you to sort of
negatively interpret the world uh then
being able to memorize the playback of
the opposite of that lay it over the
brain pull you out of that into a new
region uh would be phenomenal yeah and
that's yeah you you know you basically
yeah you basically have it so I think we
had a paper that came out in the
proceedings the National Academy of
Science like a month ago
one of my
um Superstar
um was a postdoc and a in a research
fellow within Psychiatry residency he's
faculty now so he's already kind of
moving up the food chain but um Anish
Mitra and so he spent 10 years
um looking at this phenomenon of
in you know brain
connectivity is reflected in the
fluctuations of the of the blood within
a given brain region and so that's
reflective of electrical activity it's a
surrogate of electrical activity that we
can measure really easily with with MRI
and so you know he was able to find that
in brain regions that are connected
where we kind of average over how the
fluctuations you know
um occur within time within that brain
region that there's actually a subtle
offset between a connected brain region
suggesting causality so if this area is
slightly in front of this area it's
likely that this area is signaling to
this area right and so what he found was
that cingulate
area and that dorsolateral area you know
have a temporal offset from each other
and in normal non-depressed individuals
essentially everyone
um the left or scholateral that control
region is temporarily in front of the
cingulate
in depression
some in this case 70 percent of the
sample the cingulate was in front
of the dorsolateral anterior insulin
in the individuals that responded to our
stimulation approach essentially all of
them had this flip
the people that didn't respond none of
them had the flip and on the post scan
it flipped back to normal on the people
it had the abnormality BM begin with and
had the clinically relevant change in
their symptomatology
and so what we call the other kind of
interesting thing is what we call
depression is probably a you know a
combination of multiple things right and
we saw this 100 years ago with with
idiopathic Parkinson's disease what we
think about is
you know true to form Parkinson's right
there's actually a bunch of other things
that look like Parkinson's and you know
historically they're all lumped together
Lewy Body uh dementia
Progressive super nuclear palsy
um you know idiopathic Parkinson's
disease you know other things all lumped
together and then over time we figured
out how to separate them based off of
you know techniques of in this case you
know being able to do kind of postmortem
studies of people but you know in the
case of depression I think we're going
to use non-invasive biological
techniques to say okay this group has
this particular signaling
abnormality in this group has something
else you know and trying to kind of
separate that out but at least in a
sub-population of people to your point
it's this flipping of the signal and so
the kind of sadness region and areas
around it are signaling to the the
control region probably having dominance
over it
you're out there making a million
decisions every single day and each
pointless choice you have to make like
what color socks to wear or what jacket
to put on is just another distraction
from the game-changing decisions that
you should be focusing on Save the brain
power and the hassle of choosing what
shoes you wear with vessel vessi's shoes
are made with a patented knit material
that is both waterproof and breathable
keeping your feet cool in the summer and
warm in the winter and dry no matter
what check out all of Bessie Styles at
vesi.com
impact and use code impact for 15 off
your order simplify your life with
Bessie yeah man perception is everything
so going back to
why we have such an epidemic of
depression and why um kovid really
kicked it off is this so out of control
yeah so that makes sense to me in terms
of why covid would exacerbate it I I
have a broader Theory that I would love
for you to dismantle and help make me
smarter that I would have thought was
true leading into covid and that is
um Lisa Feldman Barrett is she at
Stanford do you know she wrote a book
called how emotions are made I don't
remember now where she's from but
um she talks about how the emotions we
have we perceive as coming from our
thoughts but in reality it's a
Confluence of thoughts the body largely
the gut and then the brain sort of going
back and forth in this communication you
sort of never know which started the
whole conversation but they're going
back and forth and the Brain will
ultimately create a narrative about why
you feel the way that you feel and
having spent a lot of time looking at
nutrition I think a lot about nutrition
obviously the impact that that has on
the gut than if the gut is involved in
Emotion in communicating with the brain
I was looking at the modern world going
okay our diets are just absolute
tragedies we no longer have to exercise
to survive so now exercise becomes
completely optional Modern Life
especially with social media is pushing
people into isolation even if you're
around people you're emotionally distant
you're emotionally isolated and so you
start putting all of that together and
everything just deranges just enough
that
um especially if you're already
predisposed of this because of childhood
trauma now you're just you're way out of
whack but only some of that I would
liken to control like Diet that's to me
sort of a bodily communication that's
microbes that are sort of derailing or
you may also and this part
I don't I don't have I don't even have
another person that has said something
along these lines that makes me think
this but when I think about mitochondria
mitochondrial dysfunction if there's any
sort I mean there has to be signaling of
some kind so it's like where are we
picking up on that signaling is that
also part of the body telling us that
there's a problem and if your diet's off
you're gonna feel in the gut and in the
mitochondria so do you think any of that
played into pre-covet and then kova just
exacerbates it with control or is
depression really just you feel out of
control that's the pattern and when you
have it you're in real trouble
um I mean and that gets back to the you
know the statement I said earlier around
you know there are probably multiple
things that kind of get lumped into
depression right not everyone
you know some people kind of are in an
over control phenomenon you know so it's
not everybody necessarily has this um
has a kind of a perceived loss control
necessarily right and that may be more
of a problem of us being a kind of
lumpers instead of Splitters on the
diagnosis but to your question I mean it
what's hard about
um understanding any psychiatric
condition is that you need to establish
some level of causality right it's the
reason why psychiatrists over here
neurology is over here is because in
neurology you know the the game is
where's the lesion
you know and in Psychiatry historically
there is no lesion right there's no kind
of lesion that we can pick up on on
standard Imaging methodologies that are
employed because the dysfunction just
isn't tied to a lesion well it's
electrical you know effectively so what
we think about as a lesion really ends
up being you know in the case of that
paper I talked about earlier flipping of
the signaling directionality it
functions kind of like illusion so if
you take people that have
depression from a stroke and you look at
you know you look at where all those
Strokes fell on a common brain Atlas
like functional Atlas
um
you know Mike Fox and others um at
Harvard found that
um you know brain lesions that are
functionally connected to that same
control region
are um you know are associated with
depression and and brain lesions that
don't follow within a network that's
connected to that control region don't
have to you know those individuals on so
if you saw if I had a stroke and you
looked at it you would determine by the
region of the brain that I had the
stroke and whether I'm now at higher
risk for a stroke related depression or
not yeah so they I think they're doing
those prospectively now but in a
retrospective way at a group level you
can put all those lesions in the brain
and the vast majority of them
would if you had depression from stroke
would be functionally connected to that
same control region and so
you know it looks like a lot of what we
think about as depression ends up being
you know that sort of a problem but but
to your point right it's it's a
complicated it's a complicated thing
right if you you know if you stimulate
on the vagus nerve
um in the you know in the neck
um you can you know produce signals up
into the brain and treat depression
right and there's a huge medicare-funded
study going on right now to start paying
for something like that where you
actually stimulate a cranial nerve you
know that that also you know propagates
down to the gut propagates to the heart
you know and if you stimulate and go up
it'll
um you know it'll affect those same core
brain regions to to your point the brain
and the gut and the heart are all you
know you know well interconnected and so
you know causal mapping and
understanding of some of the questions
that you're talking about is exactly
kind of the way to do it you know and
you can actually it's not a hypothesis
you can actually test it right because
you can you can cause interruptions or
you can accentuate signals in any of
those spots and then see how it changes
the mood you can do the same thing with
functional you with neurostimulation
either invasive or non-invasive you can
look at the same sort of thing with
lesions like stroke lesions and with all
of that information we've been able to
develop maps that tell us kind of what
is connected to what and what systems
are signaling but it's still really
early days I mean I tell people this is
like 1950s 1960s Cardiology
you know it's it's not you know
developed at the level where where there
are 10 texts you know 10 chapters I'm
sorry 10 volumes of a of a textbook you
know like in cardiology where you see a
rhythm on an EKG and you know exactly
what it is what's causing it you know
what it's called that whole thing like
Psychiatry is very far away from that
that reality but there's definite roads
in the last 10 years to where we're
headed in that direction there's a clear
signal I think that we're we're gonna go
there and that we're going to be able to
map it out and to your point earlier
about the you know where AI I think is
really useful is that this is such a
complicated
you know process and it's so much more
complex than just simply what's going on
measurements in the heart but it's these
complex Dynamics between the heart and
the gut and the brain that it's going to
take you know a lot of kind of dense
data collection to really also
understand at the behavioral level
what's going on
um
you know I think covet exacerbated kind
of a cultural
you know problem that we're having
around being separated being you know
you know being on Facebook instead of
seeing somebody in person that whole
piece of things which also contributes
to to depressed mood and then it kind of
take away the control Factor take away
the ability to
to see people in person wearing masks
being at home you know being kind of
stuck at home for a period of time or
whatever it is
and uh I think that sense of control
goes goes further and further down you
know we think about depression like we
think about
you know how many fingers you have on
your hand or something but it's actually
on a it's on a gradient you know we just
draw a line and say this is like the
syndrome that is depression and below
this it's normal
but if you look at it like the scales
that we use for what's normal
people could be you know reasonably
symptomatic you know at the high range
of that you know so they'll still
somebody can be what we call in
remission or
you know no depression and still have
10 points on a 60 point scale
right and and I'd argue that actually
like like most people aren't a zero you
know most I'm not or not yeah I mean we
see we see people I mean it was funny
the other day one of one of the patients
running for it through our trial
um you know my wife works with me at
Stanford too and she's a psychiatrist
and runs a lot of the clinical operation
and so
cinemat you know one of the other guys
that's working with me sent a message
and said this patient's a zero and then
like the conversation was oh how great
would it be to be a zero because nobody
as zero means you slept eight hours last
night you fell asleep immediately you
slept all through the night you woke up
rested you're completely not anxious
you're you're completely optimistic in a
good mood and you you got up without any
problem and you got going and you know
so it's it's it's hard to you know when
you get down to it I think a lot more
people even than the percentages that we
think about that are in true to form
depressive episodes or having some
you know kind of mild symptoms and you
know the the number of those people that
um you know a number of people that were
experiencing those mild symptoms I think
in covid probably went up too we don't
track that but I think that would be my
suspicion as well what's interesting and
kind of you know one of my theories I
think will happen in the future is
just like with blood pressure and
cholesterol and all these other things
where we say oh this is the bad number
and then we're gonna We shift it oh and
we're now we're going to be more
conservative this is actually the bad
number and you need to have your LDL
even lower or you need to have your
blood pressure even lower or whatever it
is I think that we're going to get to a
place as we get better at this
um tracking it and treating it that you
know the number of what's acceptable
what's normal or whatever may move a
little bit too because I think that
somebody on a
10 points on a 60 point scale that's
that's probably not ideal either right
you know I was gonna say I haven't been
a zero since I was like nine yeah so
yeah getting to a zero would be amazing
in fact I have struggled pretty
profoundly with anxiety
uh part of why I came up with the thesis
around diet was that was the Big Fix for
me it didn't take me to a zero though I
would say it it alleviated my symptoms
by 70 it took it from completely
unmanageable what the hell is going on
in my life this is really a problem too
okay back to you know where I've been
since I was a little kid where I would
say I'm probably more prone to anxiety
than the average person but
um from uh I don't need to take
medication or anything like that so
um
that is the thought of being at a zero
is like somebody saying that I could be
a superhero so that would when I was
researching you I was like yo
transcranial magnetic stimulation is
something I would very much like to try
I want to do your five-day process I
don't know how hard that is if that's
like I can just roll up and we zap me or
like yeah but that that would be crazy
because I've told my wife when I'm when
I'm anxious I feel like I'm mortal and
when my anxiety is at a zero I truly
feel like a superhero and it and it does
happen every now and then I'll be just
in a perfect zone of comfort where I'm
supremely confident in my abilities and
something the stakes are really low you
know and it's like okay yeah this this
is how I want to feel all the time and
the fact that I almost never feel like
that it's it's been sort of the Holy
Grail of what I've been chasing since I
started researching the brain and it's
interesting because I never put my
finger on control before but that really
would be a very easy way to
recontextualize what brain plasticity
allowed me to believe in is that I
controlled my future my future wasn't
controlled by my current level of
intellect which was my big struggle I
didn't think I was smart enough to do
the things I wanted to do and
once I realized oh wait I can get better
then it was like okay now I felt in
control and I didn't conceive of it that
way I just felt like there's something I
can do but that's really really
fascinating okay so keeping it um very
tangible for people for a minute so
covet hits
people are getting isolated they are
freaked out about what the future feels
like they definitely feel completely out
of control did you have a or do you have
a best practices for people in hard
times like that to avoid sliding into
depression
Yeah It's Tricky I mean I I think um you
know the kind of standard answer there
right would be that folks
if they had a therapist to go and you
know chat with a therapist about what's
going on how how does how do we make
therapy work for us is this cognitive
behavioral therapy talk therapy yeah I
think that's for all like a lot of the
digital Therapeutics work that that
folks have been trying to you know
because therapists are hard to get
there's you know many times you're
paying out of pocket they're expensive
in the you know the Bay Area I'm sure in
La it's the same thing like it's you
know it's a complicated process to get a
hold of a therapist so trying to figure
out ways to scale that through digital
means makes a lot of sense you know
there hasn't been a whole lot of
preventative work that's been done in
Psychiatry
um you know it's mostly been you have
you now have this diagnosis now we're
going to start doing something I don't
think that's the fault of any one
um I don't think that's the fault of the
field or anything it's just like it's
hard enough to treat it when it gets to
this point
but I'd argue actually it may be better
to um to you know try to intervene
earlier we try to do this study with
orthopedic surgery at Stanford it was
just very hard to
to coordinate and kind of figure out how
to do it
um
you know with all everything else that
was going on but people had motor
vehicle accidents
broke their leg or broke their hip or
whatever they have this huge conversion
rate to PTSD and depression later whoa
yeah why PTSD they just went through a
traumatic event with a car accident and
they thought they may have died they may
die you know in that that moment that
they were you know head-to-head
Collision or whatever it is you know and
so they have these
traumatic experiences and it's an
opportunity to try to prevent to your
point you know could you use brain
stimulation to try to get in there and
prevent this you know future
um symptomatic event from happening
um you know there's been some work we
know that heart heart attacks myocardial
infarctions you you know you have this
post Mi
depression risk you know and so there's
been some work there trying to think
about ssris and okay so hold on it do
you think that that's happening because
of the brain Heart Like physical
connection so it's not a psychological
thing if I'm terrified I had a heart
attack this is Yo there's a real
physiological connection between these
two and they are communicating that
something is bad and that leads to the
depression yeah I mean that that'd be my
suspicion like is that is that um
counterintuitive for the field or is
that like yeah everybody assumes that to
be true
um you know we've done some work on this
there were a couple other people that
have done work in this were actually
like the stimulation approach that we're
using you can decelerate the heart rate
so we know actually that it's a direct
connection because you decelerate the
heart rate by starting at the brain yeah
whoa so you stimulate here and you can
very reproducibly drop the heart rate I
we are mimicking a condition of all as
well
yeah so if you turn this system on it's
involved in the parasympathetic control
of the heart you kind of drop the heart
rate right so you end up having a
reduction of heart rate by toning up
control
which makes some level of sense because
that's our parasympathetic system is set
up to where you know we're perceiving
that everything's okay and you know
we're able to
you know digest our food and have a
lower heart rate you know and you know
and counterbalanced by the sympathetic
system which is this kind of fight or
flight
process right and so
um so yeah so you can you can decelerate
the heart rate from the brain
um it's
mechanistically I think there's been
some work on this
um you know as far as trying to
understand exactly why that happens but
it definitely happens I mean people that
have heart attacks
um have a much higher risk of
post heart attack depression depression
is now one of the four leading risk
factors for having a heart attack
I'm sorry why
I mean it's just that two-way
communication yeah I mean we don't know
enough for me to be able to being
depressed increases your risk of heart
attack yes
as much as diabetes is it ramping your
heart rate over time or because I always
think of a heart attack as being about
an occlusion like blood has been blocked
by physical blockage so is the in fact
this is
we're going to fractal here very fast uh
there's two things now that are tied in
my mind I'll let you tell me how we're
going to tease them out so uh the fact
that depression increases your risk of
heart attack but that I assume heart
attack has a physical reason for
happening and is not purely
psychological but maybe you're going to
tell me this well I mean I don't think
anything's you know we
this kind of brain mind dualism thing
it's like we've divorced these things
that aren't really divorced conceptually
you know Freud kind of started that
process but it's not actually
you know they're not actually separated
right and so what what we feel and those
negative emotions and all of that
um or just play to your point playing
playing out in brain networks that are
ultimately connected to the heart we
know if we can
if we can slow the heart rate down by
turning this region up they're connected
so whatever if if this isn't sending it
signaling down to the heart
then this the heart's not receiving a
signal that it normally receives in
Wellness
now why from from the Vegas into the
heart and the coronary is why that
happens we don't know but it definitely
happens there's something called
takasubo's cardiomopathy so that's
another interesting I was going to say
that yeah you know about this yeah never
heard of this in my life I don't even I
don't even know what you just said yeah
so it's it's um it's this Japanese word
I it and it's uh I think it's like
um I I don't remember the translation I
feel like it's like some sort of basket
or something but
um but essentially it's a ballooning of
the heart
and so it can happen
um from a stroke in the brain in the
same same connected brain regions it can
also it's also called the broken heart
disease it can happen with an intense
emotional experience
yeah so when you say it's ballooning is
it adding muscle fiber to the heart like
the heart kind of dilates and they go
into heart failure so you have to like
do all sorts of heart failure Maneuvers
dilates meaning the empty space grows
larger yeah you have a cardiomyopathy
yeah you have this you know problem with
your heart pumping and you can actually
get that just from a a what we would
sort of colloquially call a broken heart
yeah I mean it's extremely rare like for
listeners like like it's a very unlikely
event you know it doesn't happen very
often but if you there was a study that
came out a couple of years ago that I
think 85 or 90 of the people that had it
had a pre-existing psychiatric diagnosis
right and then they had some you know
somebody died or something like that a
major life stressor and then all of a
sudden they ended up you know on the
cardiac unit with takasubos and so
yes you can have physical things that
happen in the Heart from things that are
happening in your brain and the idea
that somehow
the a psychiatric illness is less real
just like that's like a fiction right
like it's just as real right it you you
wouldn't be able to have a post-stroke
depression if it wasn't just as wired in
as having a post-stroke hemiparesis
where you can't move your arm
it's just that they're they're more
complex systems right and there's a
level of semi volitionality to it right
like
I'm depressed but in certain
circumstances I can house is on fire I
can run out of the house even if I feel
like I can't really move or do much you
know in the extreme case of Catatonia
you can't but most people depression you
know can can amount enough you know
energy to be able to leave a burning
building or something like that and
they're kind of back to their their base
State and so I think folks you you know
it's it's very wired in it's very
biological it's just as I think just as
biological as many other things that we
think about as like purely biological
it's just a matter of really Discovery
and understanding and coming up with
tools so that's what we've been focused
on is just like how do we build
how do we build tools and I'm a very
agnostic tool Builder I I really don't
care like what the social perception of
the tool is I really don't care what you
know um which is what we got a
psychedelics you know study ketamine do
nerve stimulation like if if it's safe
for the patient and it's acceptable for
the patient and it's something that I
would
suggest to my mother brother spouse then
um you know and the risk benefit is
right
um Do no harm and all those things right
then we'll look at it you know we don't
have any
um we don't have any kind of off limits
because I have some conceptual problem
with something you know
um and so I think that's that's been
very useful and it's given us the
ability to ask a lot of interesting
questions
um because we're willing to go into
these spaces that
um you know not not so many people are
willing to go in within the mental
health kind of research space so yeah
I'm I am incredibly uh eager to pursue
that path and figure out
um what theory LED you to psychedelics
but first there's another thing that
feels related to the
um the emotional trauma creating heart
trauma connection that I wanted to talk
about which is what you call Psychiatry
3.0 so this idea that um in fact if you
don't mind walk people through
Psychiatry one two and now 3.0
um yeah definitely and this is uh a
concept
you know not just for me buddy of mine
Jonathan downers been talking about this
as well it's a it's a concept of
um you know we've basically had three
major epochs within Psychiatry and kind
of modern
modern Psychiatry with you know Freud
Ford
um the first one being that the problem
is inherently a Content problem
content of your thoughts yeah and
Psychotherapy effectively is you know
the ability to you know to introduce
different ways of looking at the
information or different frame points of
view or framing of it or introducing new
relationships in the case of the their
patient therapist relationship where the
dynamic changes so the person can have
insights you know that's that's
basically Psychiatry one 1.0
the kind of transition between 1.0 which
is psychotherapy focused in 2.0
which is you know psychopharmacology
focused there was a major kind of
historical issue there and there were
two camps you know there were the
analysts psychotherapists and there was
psychopharmacol psychopharmacologists
and that happened over
you know the
50s 60s 70s even into you know into the
80s and some of this still extends in
today and this is going to be ssris and
things like that yeah you know like
Thorazine the early antipsychotics that
took the schizophrenic patient out of
long-term care so there's a big Exodus
of patience
um you know early monoamine oxidase
Inhibitors and tricyclic drugs that were
the precursors to ssris
those drugs really you know kind of
um Jarred the idea that it was totally
content because if you can just take a
pill and then all of a sudden to kind of
your point the person has a total change
in perspective how could that be if it's
a Content problem
um and then
what I would say Psychiatry 3.0 kind of
circuit-based thinking about
you know mental illness aligns it with
neurology neurosurgery you know in all
of those Specialties into kind of a
common circuit language
you know I can have I'm trained as a
psychiatrist and neurologist but you
know kind of I can have a psychiatric
Dialogue on the circuit level with and
you know fellow neurologist or a
neurosurgeon
then you're speaking the same language
and we've never really been there we
haven't been there since pre-fraud you
know with the kind of discussion around
what the problem is with a patient with
psychiatric illness with epilepsy
whatever
and so what's useful about Psychiatry
3.0 is that it it Embraces the first two
right because it takes the first two
into account and says okay
if you're Psychotherapy or if you're
drug moves this circuit then and you
know our stimulation moves the circuit
we can have a
um what we what we would call a modality
independent kind of predictive biomarker
right something like this or you know
area that changes or however you want to
think about it and so it's more about
the end product of the kind of
biological change
and that
as a tool maker and as somebody who
thinks a lot about making you know
building tools and building measurements
so those tools
you know it makes you very agnostic like
how do we figure out what what the
problem is and then how do we move the
problem circuitry around such that we
understand we can even further confirm
it and then it's just a simple thing of
does this move that circuit you know and
it gets us out of
all these theories and stuff which I'm
less inclined to you know necessarily be
thinking about you know I'm much more
just trying to figure this out and I
think that's what
um
that's what Psychiatry 3.0 effectively
is is the ability to develop a
circuit-based understanding and then
develop new treatments based off of
circuit measures and then then think
about the existing treatments based off
of those same circuit measures and
really get us away from
the you know the negative
Framing and Psychiatry 1.0 was the
framing of the schizophrenogenic mother
you know this whole idea that somehow
you're parenting a lot of schizophrenia
you know that person's parent LED them
to develop schizophrenia which has been
totally debunked right interesting so
what was that original Theory
yeah no there's a you know kind of over
controlling mother you know and and all
that sort of thing and then all of a
sudden this patient had you know had
schizophrenia and all and a lot of do
you think there's anything in the wives
tale of that that it's
uh early trauma you feel out of control
because the mother's controlling you so
It ultimately it ends up being a circuit
thing because my my next question in
understanding the circuits is
is the circuit the manifestation of
another root cause or is the circuit the
root cause and I couldn't do anything
to influence it because I can influence
it from the outside so it seems like if
I can fix it from the outside I can
probably break it oh yeah from the
outside and certainly if you let me
control diet and things like that I can
probably really do some damage so I'm
curious I get it that it isn't just mom
is what made me this but is there some
element of what they're groping for is
that person with a mom that was that
unhinged they're probably this cascading
set of problems that are relatively
predictable yeah I mean you know that
particular idea has been debunked you
know the the next thing I was going to
say was this you know chemical imbalance
kind of idea which has essentially been
debunked the idea that or wait I think
we shouldn't blow past that because even
for me that stops me so you're saying
Psychiatry 2.0 uh this is a serotonin
imbalance false we've it's it's not a
it's not a problem where there isn't you
know the messaging history Berkeley has
been there isn't enough your brain is
faulty because there isn't enough
of external transmitter in place and
then therefore you need this drug and
it's not really you know there's no
evidence of that right
um and so we've known yeah so but to
plant a flag
which I'd love you to speak to uh ssris
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
they work they do some percentage of
people but it isn't because of the way
that it's balancing your serotonin is
that the yeah so the idea I mean what we
think is really going on there because
it you know as you know it takes kind of
a while for it to work a month two
months whatever is that it's actually
upregulating plasticity to your point
right and specifically bdnf yeah and so
for people that don't know do you have
brain derived neurotrophic Factor yeah
so it's just like a brain
you know kind of growth promoting Factor
right and so you know it's probably more
like that or more like it's having an
interaction with some of the you know
kind of dendritic spines that sort of
thing much less about acutely up
regulating serotonin because if it
if it worked like that then it would
work in a day or two days or three days
right it actually takes time for it to
work because there's something else
um more complex going on and
you know the the problem at a
fundamental level is you put a drug in
your body that upregulates also to your
point earlier GI serotonin like gut
serotonin and all that we don't have
conclusive human studies saying this is
how this works for ssris we've done that
with ketamine right where you know my
lab in collaboration with Alan chatsburg
and Boris Heifetz at Stanford
um
then to my knowledge the only study
that's totally blocked an antidepressant
effect and that was with ketamine where
we were able to use a Opia blocker and
actually block the antidepressant
effects totally of ketamine with with
co-administration of an opiate blocker
when you give somebody that same person
ketamine with with a placebo pill they
have a they have a perfectly good you
know remission from ketamine so what I'm
drawing from that is that ketamine is
not working at the disassociative level
it's working at the opiate level it's
the opiate level is necessary it may not
be sufficient but it's necessary
you know and those people had the same
amount of dissociation when they had the
Naltrexone so it's that's not sufficient
the Naltrexone being the thing that
blocked the opiate yeah that is very
interesting yeah but to get back to the
SSRI thing you know I think that the big
messaging there which I think you know
the field is known for a long time but I
think optically there's been over the
last couple of years a real intent to
walk back from is that there's some
missing
thing in your brain that the the Pharma
is somehow gonna you know that these
ssris or whatever it is are gonna
replace
then I'd argue that the neurostimulation
work that we're doing even further
accentuates that if depression as a
serotonin problem in that way
stimulation shouldn't be the answer
right you don't it'd only be replacement
of of you know
um neurotransmitters that are lacking or
whatever right it's this idea that it's
really a circuit problem and that's kind
of what Psychiatry 3.0 gets into now
stimulation of circuits releases
neurotransmitters so it's not it's not
divorced from that idea it's just much
more complicated than that idea but also
empowering because it doesn't seem like
you need any of that stuff in your
system to get better you can get better
without any of it in your system it
really it's just really about engaging
the brain circuitry that's involved
so yeah I think you know each each era
kind of debunked the last era and
re-contextualized the last era to
understand it more but it's not kicking
any treatments out to your point as to
surprise
have saved lots of lives they're you
know you introduced an SSRI into a
country in the suicide rates go down you
know so we know that that those drugs
you know do
um you know do have an effect the issue
ultimately ends up being that not
everybody responds to them what we call
treatment resistance or hard to treat
depression or whatever term you want to
use and in those individuals those are
the individuals that we study we don't
study treatment naive people those are
do you have any sense of what the
treatment resistant people have in
common
yeah that's part of what we're trying to
figure out now some of that flipping of
the signal that I was talking about
earlier is one potential
how easy it is to flip the signal for
them oh just the fact that it's flipped
you know we don't know we know in a
highly treatment resistant population
that most of them had it but going back
and looking actually at the broader
treatment naive depressive population
understand that
um you know to understand it you know in
the context of people that are treatment
resistant versus treatment responding
with a given oral antidepressant you
know
um you know Leanne Williams and others
have been trying to look at that as it
relates to kind of earlier stage
treatments and how to do predictions
with brain brain circuitry but it's you
know it's a
it's a very hard problem to solve
because
we're we don't know how the treatments
work and
we you know or at least the oral
antidepressants we don't fully know how
they work and we don't fully know
in a given individual what the brain's
circuitry differences are and so you're
you're kind of you have two variables
that aren't well controlled and so
that's why we've focused primarily on
things like stimulation where you can
say okay I'm stimulating here I I know
this isn't going into the rest of my
brain I know it isn't going into my body
I'm just stimulating here then I'm
trying to figure out what's different
about the people that get well from just
stimulating here versus the people that
don't get well it controls a lot more of
it so that you can derive some sort of
answers in humans in mice we have a lot
of really cool science around that but
you know Translating that it's been hard
you know as far as drug effects and all
that so man one thing I'd be very
curious to see people look at would be
bdnf
and specifically bdnf and recidivism so
as you're talking about it one of the
things that if somebody came to me and
they said hey I'm depressed the first
thing I'm going to say is get your diet
and under control meaning basically
don't need sugar Whole Foods and then
exercise now exercise I never really
knew I have no idea why it works but
certainly exercise spikes beat ANF I've
heard bdnf referred to as Miracle Grow
for the brain and if what this is and
the reason I I would love to see it
looked at with recidivism so let's say
somebody does your five-day protocol so
for people that haven't sort of put it
together yet you have transcranial
magnetic stimulation you put a device in
the head that zaps them basically gets
the circuits to go in the right order
again so we're doing that but then my
question is at the end of the five days
what do the people have in common where
that lasts for a long time and what do
the people have in common where that
falls off really fast now I have no idea
but this at least would be testable is
what are the either the bdnf response
rate to the treatment or the Baseline
levels of bdnf like are they bdnf super
producers low they're probably low
already or they wouldn't be in the study
if my hypothesis is correct but then as
we test them we can see like of that
population like which like pumps that
harder which lower and then if the
people that were in the the responder
bdnf group meaning they they create more
of it if they had a longer shelf life of
efficacy of the protocol then it's like
oh maybe there's something there right
that's really interesting that would
certainly explain because it's my
understanding I could be wrong about
this but it's my understanding that uh
exercise has a higher efficacy rate than
ssris
is that true
um
you'd have to look I'd have to look at
the study I mean I think that there's
definitely
um in mild kind of mild even maybe
moderate depression there's good
evidence that exercise is very effective
you know aerobic exercise
more than weightlifting
um
to I haven't seen you know there haven't
been any
studies at scale you know there's it's
usually like single site studies sort of
thing and they're comparing like a
standard treatment versus
um you know one exercise regimen I'm not
aware of
multiple different you may have this
study at your fingertips but multiple
different exercise regiment regimens
versus say a standard treatment like an
oral um antidepressants I don't have it
at my fingertips but that is a very
worthy thing to look into I'd be super
curious to see what that is the other
thing about exercise so this goes into
your Psychiatry 1.0 2.0 3.0 so if
content is part of the problem it just
it's not sufficient to explain the
phenomena uh
if I were if I really wanted someone to
feel good about themselves like I
literally just had a woman come to me
she was really upset she had just had
she got scammed basically and lost I
don't know if everything but lost a lot
and was at a dark place in her career
also got scammed and so she was just
like really down on herself yeah and I
was like look if I had just lost
everything the fir this is so weird I'm
putting things together in real time
thank you very much uh
what what I said there is if I lost
everything the first thing I would do is
start working out because when you work
out you realize you have complete
control yeah over your body over what
you eat over the way you look how you
feel which again man you really put
something together for me uh so
that is interesting so working out will
make you feel better about yourself one
because you'll just start improving two
you have control and that sense of like
I can do the right things and I can end
up in a better situation I can change
the way I look which hey people can I'm
agnostic like like you're agnostic about
what the tool ends up being I I'm
agnostic as to why looking good makes
people feel better but it does so you
can whine and cry that people shouldn't
want their ass to look great in jeans
but it is super motivating for humans
um man that's interesting I will be very
curious to see what comes of all that
there was some studies where they Botox
gilbeller right here this muscle here
and uh treat depression
because they can't scowl yeah
I mean well I mean that's that's one
idea right is that if you you know
there's some feedback kind of where the
more you smile the better you feel you
know that sort of thing and if you can
block kind of frown muscles Maybe
you know and these things are you know
kind of wired all the way back
um into emotion circuitry so it it makes
some sense that
um you know that
intervening even in those places would
make sense to have a mood improving
effect but still kind of grounded in
this idea of it being ultimately
seeable within the brain circuitry you
know
that idea of the expression you wear on
your face controlling your emotions is
one of the things that got me to start
saying to myself at first you're having
a biological experience was
um my I I work a lot and this was also
true when I was younger and my wife and
I were just married and we would
inevitably get in arguments on Saturday
it was like the only day that we had to
spend together yeah and so
I I am slow to anger but once I get
angry it's not as true anymore but it
used to be once I got angry I would stay
angry for a very long time so I ended up
writing this note and giving it to my
wife and I said the next time I get mad
just read me this letter and in the
letter I said hey me it's me there there
there's no ulterior motive here you know
that if you stay mad all day you're
gonna regret this you've never once
stayed mad and been like I'm so glad I
was mad all day uh so what I want you to
do right now is laugh out loud because
you know that if you force yourself to
because it's from that study where they
put a pencil in your mouth and you bite
down and it sort of forces you into this
faux smile yeah and I would not be
surprised if there's a replication
crisis around that but laughing for sure
will change your neurochemistry and so I
did it she only had to read me the
letter once because when I burst into
laughter I it changed my neurochemistry
so rapidly partly because I just felt
ridiculous but in an amusing way and
it changed my neurochemistry so fast and
so profoundly that I was like oh my God
now at the time what I said to myself is
you're just a neurochemical processing
plant now maybe I'm just a circuitry or
circuit board and you know I'm turning
on the right circuits but
that was like whoa that little thing has
had such a big impact on my marriage
that realizing how by manipulating my
face I can make myself feel differently
that's just weird to me but it's so
useful
yeah I mean I think that yeah we're this
reverberating system on itself right and
if you can impact some aspect of it then
you can change the system and so it
makes a lot of sense that yeah those are
essentially
um you know psychotherapeutic techniques
in in many ways you know like a CBT sort
of technique so yeah that's awesome now
when you're not on camera do you have a
secret hypothesis about how this all
adds up from a root cause perspective
like what is all of this I know you need
data and I know you don't nobody knows
right now but do you have a sort of
mental map in your brain that you know
will probably get debunked over time but
that anchors you to what you look at
next one of the most provocative papers
that's come out over the last you know
couple of years as it relates to
thinking about psychiatric illness and
serotonin and that whole story
is this
um this paper that came out of UC Davis
a couple of months ago in science where
they
they showed that in um
if you were to kind of agonize the five
eight the intracellular 5-ht2a receptors
um where the neurons you're able to
produce changes in dendritic spine
um and producing dendritic spine
enlargement
um but you know they weren't able to see
that with extracellular 5-ht2a receptors
we think about these as serotonin
receptors but the problem with that kind
of conceptualization of them is that
serotonin
doesn't cross through the cell membrane
so it doesn't seem to get into The 5ht2a
receptors that are intracellular and
agonize them because they're not
lipophilic enough and so the substances
that do cross that are lipophilic and
seemingly agonize these intracellular
receptors the only ones that seem to be
responsible for producing these
dendritic spine enlargements that we
think are probably linked to
antidepressant effects
are psychedelic compounds
you know and folks have over time
theorized although this is completely
unproven
um that the brain actually has its own
endogenous at least dimethyltryptamine
production I've heard that right and um
there have been a number of animal human
studies and epilepsy patients and CSF
and all this stuff trying to trying to
look at that none of it's been
particularly conclusive but it's
interesting right why would you have a
receptor that we were thinking about as
a serotonin receptor in a place that's
inaccessible to serotonin
and you end up you know is that is that
like a vestigial receptor right like our
appendix or tonsils or whatever it's
just vestigial and it's not
you know nothing endogenously activates
it which is probably the least
provocative thing to think about if that
science paper replicates and that's a
real
that's a real you know consistent
finding
um if if we endogenously make DMT
that's kind of wild right you know
because
it's a schedule on substance like it's
something that that
we you know that U.S government
officials have blocked us from getting
you know from a plant but if the brain
makes it it kind of turns that whole
thing on its head don't we also make
opioids and cannabinoids yeah so
certainly the they have a long history
of blocking things that we already make
in the body yeah that's fair uh okay
that's super interesting so I'm gonna
put it in my words so there is
potentially a receptor in the brain that
is designed for psychedelics at least
some subset of what we think of as
psychedelics it's yeah I mean it's yeah
and that would be the third idea is that
it's there because of some exogenous use
yeah it's definitely I wasn't even
thinking about that so that from an
evolutionary standpoint is possible that
we pass through a period where use was
common enough that the brain evolved to
use it for lack of a better word yeah
that would be the third idea and and
you know the the number two and number
three obviously very provocative but
it's not really explainable that this is
It's not
and can we see have has there been any
study done where we give people a
psychedelic and then look at if it's
binding to those receptors yeah that was
part of what the UC Davis folks were
doing so they see it it is happening
yeah yeah and and um you know only
dendritic spines do grow as a result yep
yeah and and you can get it if you make
if you kind of
um
so the experiment that was interesting
that they did was they also you know
used chemical agents to make the cell
membrane more permeable something that
you couldn't do with a human brain
because it would be problematic but for
the purposes of of of understanding this
at the cellular level they were able to
make you know the cell membrane more
permeable so that serotonin can get
through and then if serotonin can
actually get through that it does
agonize that receptor and it does also
do that and change the dendritic spines
but it's one of these things where
that's probably not what's actually
going on and you you know uh normally
because it's not actually permeable and
so that it draws up these other
questions of is this effectively a you
know a receptor that
that receives
um you know input from other
non-serotonin sources
and um yeah you know I I think um
figuring that out is going to be very if
that's true figuring out why that is is
going to be really Central to
understanding
a lot of kind of socio-cultural
um reasons for mental illness
why they're there what it is why that
receptor is in that particular place I
mean it's
it just opens up a whole whole host of
questions that that we definitely don't
have any answers to
okay so did people uh start deciding
that there must be DMT endogenously
produced because they saw these
receptors and knew that it would fit in
no that's this is way before it was
theories about why people have these
near-death experiences or these kind of
phenomenon and around death and so we
have never been able to uh validate that
there have been studies you know CSF
studies in humans and various animal
studies
um but it's it's not well established
right
um Rick straussman who's a psychiatrist
and he was at University of New Mexico
did all this work with the Mt
in the 90s and early 2000s published a
book on it
trying to understand what DMT is and you
know in his book he theorizes about
endogenous DMT and the fact that you
know the idea that it may may be present
um but yeah hasn't been enough work to
kind of conclusively establish it and
there hasn't really been
a real reason to do it before this UC
Davis paper because it was like yeah
that may be there but like you know
there's it's not like there's a lock
without a key and now all of a sudden
it's like oh there may be a locker key
you know there may be a door that you
can only get to in a certain way and
it's and it's um you know I think it's
it's a pretty pretty important question
to answer if that really if a couple
more Labs can replicate this and show
that that's the case
then it's going to be important to
understand that because that means
something inherent about
ultimately about how our brain
plasticity works right you know and and
curious right if you did have endogenous
DMT when does endogenous DMT get
released you know does it people think
it's released during these near-death
experiences does it get released during
sleep does it get released during High
you know High exertion exercise you know
where you hit these kind of flow States
you know I mean these are all the sort
of
questions you know that uh that we have
no answers for but are just kind of
interesting you know
um yeah all right so I want to talk
about treatment treatment resistant
depression and
um
psychedelics so I I have never done I
I've micro dose psilocybin I noticed
effectively nothing and then as I pushed
it pushed it a little bit it started to
feel a little bit like I was drunk but
like yeah uh so I've never done a macro
dose where I expected something to
happen yeah but nonetheless when
somebody comes to me and is like yo I've
been struggling with this for a long
time like I'm really scared I'm going to
take my own life one of the things that
obviously go get therapy immediately do
not pass go I'm not the guy to talk to
yeah but as by way of making a checklist
to run by your therapist here are things
that I would say
um try all the things that we know work
and if none of that works then I would I
personally in my own life would not
consider myself to have tried everything
until I had tried I'd start with MDMA
which I know is outside of
um technically being a psychedelic but
it's just from uh my my whole theory
around it's the context it's your frame
of reference it's the simulation is
glitching and it's a way to rapidly
reorient the simulation everything is
good and to revisit whatever problem
you're having through that lens of like
everything's good I love everyone I'm
hopeful uh if that also didn't work then
I would move on to like more traditional
psychedelics I'm curious and I only say
that because I've read enough headlines
I haven't really gone into the studies
but I've read enough headlines no
there's it seems like there's really
something there obviously warrants
further exploration but really seems to
be that treatment resistant depression
seems to yield in a very substantive
number of cases to psychedelics
um obviously you gave us a little bit of
a forerunner there with DMT and the
possible key to the lock of The
receptors in our brain but what what is
coming out of that research where do we
think that goes why does it seem to work
and how often does it work yeah that's a
great question so you know is that the
Psychedelic science
um conference in Denver a couple of
weeks ago I was at the 2013 one
um really telling anybody I was going to
the 2013 one but I was able to tell
everybody I went to the 2023 one so
things have changed quite a bit in the
last decade around this topic
um
and you know a lot more data right we
know a lot more about what what these
things can do MDMA seems to be a very
profound
um you know anti-trauma
sort of substance
um PTSD that sort of thing
there's been one positive trial that was
in nature medicine a couple of I guess a
year or two back uh one of my best
friends who's
um in my wedding was
um you know one of the investigators in
that paper and they did a great job on
that work there's another there's
another positive study that's going to
come out soon and people expect FDA to
weigh in on this
um soon and they actually released the
guidance for doing studies in
psychedelics during the the last day of
the conference ironically
psilocybin has been studied to your
point in both major depression it's not
necessarily treatment resistant and in
individuals the true to form treatment
resistant depression
the major depression data Robin Card
Harris had some of that went into New
England Journal there's another
um paper that is going to arise from um
Chuck razon and that group
um and uh he's he's holding that data
close to his chest so we we get the
sense that it's good but but haven't
seen it
um and that's in more non-treatment
resistant major depression where you see
higher you know response for Mission
rates and the compass
um
the compass trial that was the treatment
resistant trial the data was good it was
um
you know it wasn't as
profound as what we were able to see
with a less treatment resistant folks
but you know about a third of people had
benefit from it that was clinically
relevant
um and what dose were they giving people
like is this a full-blown hallucination
or it was all the benefit really was
only observed in like the full
full dose right like the with the 25
milligram dose which is 25 milligrams of
pure psilocybin the active ingredient
and magic mushrooms when you think about
or psilocybin mushrooms or however you
want to talk about it if you think about
actually you know ingesting the
mushrooms themselves you're talking
about grams of mushrooms you know
there's a certain conversion factor of
grams of mushrooms to actual psilocybin
the problem you know
with the grams of mushroom thing
is that the
depending upon if you're getting
mushrooms from this place or that place
or this person or that person or
whatever it is the mushrooms end up
being different concentrations of
psilocybin
compared to like you know how much which
is why I'm you know I'm pretty
supportive of the kind of medicalization
of this because I especially for
treating diagnoses I think it's
important if you've got somebody that's
to your point suicidally depressed I
want to if I'm going to give them
something that has psilocybin and I want
to know actually how much psilocybin
they really are getting because the 10
milligram Group which is still not a
trivial that's over a micro dose that
you know that's you're feeling that
didn't experience the same clinical
benefit as the 25 milligram Group which
is pretty heavy are we at heroic dose at
that point you know I I will I don't use
that term medically but that is what the
that is what others would call a heroic
dose a 25 10 would be
um
a dose that you're having you know a
psychoactive drug effect one which was
another dose in that study is
essentially a micro dose to those
nothing there not that much for the 10
clinically relevant effect about a 30
people for the 25. suggesting that you
have to have this full experience
um
you know I you know I've
I I don't have like a I'm agnostic to
all these are all tools I think they're
all going to be used for different
things
um
going to skipping neuroma you know
especially the stuff that we've been
doing with accelerated TMS
skipping that and going on to psilocybin
is tricky
and
um
and I always kind of bring people
through stem first because the risk
benefit profile and the like prep take
it's it's functionally just boring right
the prep to get somebody on board to do
that and to for them to be
psychologically ready to do that is so
low I mean I tell people if if your
doctor thinks that your treatment is
boring and you think your treatment is
boring that's great because that boring
from the standpoint of what's going on
not the outcome because that means that
it's low risk right and you know TMS and
what we call Saint this accelerated
stimulation approach these are
incredibly high risk benefit profile
sorts of things where there's a
theoretical risk of seizure we've never
actually even seen it with a stimulation
approach
um that's it headache in some people
it's Tylenol responsive and the benefit
can be huge the problem with psilocybin
isn't the people that got better you
know their people get better they get
better and it was good if you look at
the adverse event list in that study
that New England Journal study there was
a decently high risk of emergence of
more suicidal ideation or suicidal
ideation particularly the individuals
that didn't get better
and it's not necessarily from the drug
it's from this phenomenon of
disappointment and hopelessness it's
interesting right so this thing that's
supposed to be like the thing didn't
work for me and now I'm really
despondent yeah and you and that's not
even specific to psilocybin I'm not
arguing that psilocybin caused that I'm
arguing that there's just a general risk
in those sort of scenarios where you see
that sometimes we see that with people
that go through brain surgery for
depression like really really worst of
the worst though there's experimental
brain surgery sorts of moves where you
can put stimulators into the head
people that don't respond to that have a
suicide risk we've seen that
um and then you know folks who
the you know on the S ketamine
product kind of FDA product description
post study there were a number of
suicides once people were pulled off of
s ketamine which is really interesting
to get back to the kind of thing once
you get pulled off so not while you're
on it but if you stop is that a
withdrawal thing or just the depression
comes racing back uh you know
certain certain individuals would not
love it if I said that but I I think
that you know that's an open question
right
um you know because it's during the
During the period after
um after it comes off board but I think
it's this overall question of like
you know kind of mitigating risk you
know we we see this less when there are
stimulation or you know not much at all
within with a non-invasive neural
stimulation bit and I think it's because
people don't have to prep themselves to
do it it doesn't feel like such a risk
it doesn't feel like such a you know to
take a psilocybin trip as a depressed
individual that's never done it before
which is really who they're looking for
50 year old 60 year old person they've
gone through their whole life and
avoided this and now they're taking this
and they may have even had a bad
experience with it and then they're
still depressed that's not a you know
it's a tough thing
but how do you how do you prepare
yourself for it uh psychologists still
try to you know we'll do some work to
prep folks for for therapy or just
explanation of what the trip is going to
be like and how to handle it if it gets
scary yeah I mean in some ways that's
therapy too right in the sense that
you're you know supportive Psychotherapy
or however you want to think about it
but yeah I mean psycho education that
sort of thing you're trying to get the
person
to be ready to win they go into this
mental space
and then they end up
um you know feeling uh quite a bit
different and in some ways kind of out
of control right and then the kind of
control comes back online when the trip
is over you know what I mean and so
that's that's I think and then
you know processing insights you know
psychedelics produce a lot of insights
you know so processing insights
processing you know
um the positive and the negative you
know and for some people with all those
disclaimers for some people this is
incredibly transformative right they
come out of these experiences
and they feel like they're a different
person you know from like uh how how I'm
approaching you know
my significant other my friends you know
they get out of the maybe the Mental
Health crisis or their depression or
whatever it is but you know we know that
there's even lasting personality changes
that happen
you know if you give psilocybin to
normal healthy control individuals
they'll routinely rate it as one of the
top five most important like a
full-blown trip one of the top five most
important
um experiences in their lives up there
with their wedding and their kids being
born
you know and that's that's saying
something right that's pretty hard to
pull off a lot of people and into life
where they're able to process their
imminent death you know so the tools are
these tools are a little trickier than I
think the stem tools are
they have the ability to produce broader
effects because you're it's not just
about affecting the illness now
you're affecting an entire like
perceptual to your point kind of
perception of how the world works
you know what we've been working on is
um is a psychedelic that's a less known
psychedelic called ibogaine
its issue has been historically that's
um has quite a bit of cardiac risk you
know and so
um kind of one in 300 you know serious
cardiac risk right
um that those numbers come from
individuals that have received ibogaine
for the purpose of detox from usually
end-stage heroin addiction so it's
people who have probably had a heart
infection before and all that sort of
thing
um so I get connected with a group back
in 2018
um you know vets which is Amber Marcus
Capone veterans exploring Treatment
Solutions for this case TBI and ptsda
depression
and so that so Marcus actually went down
to Mexico after a buddy went down to
Mexico and took IBN his PTSD and
traumatic brain injury symptoms got
better
and Marcus his traumatic brain injury
symptoms got better um
what does that tell us well in addition
to being a brainer derived neurotrophic
Factor up regulator IBN is a glial
derived trophic Factor up regulator what
does that mean it has you know that one
has a role in regulating dopamine neuron
health and other things so it's a
broader
kind of neurotrophic factor
um up regular than just what we see with
psychedelics and what we see with ssris
if there are at least two apparently
um growth factors that you can have in
the brain are there only two are there a
whole bunch more like what is that those
are the main ones that people think
about as far as like regulating the kind
of standard
you know serotonin receptor you know
serotonin neuron dopamine neuron
um and in glial derived neurotrophic
factor in particular
yeah that's been a harder one to move
bdnf moves with a lot of different
things and so
um you know if you take a mouse and you
give you get the mouse addicted to
cocaine and you give it IBN it'll stop
being addicted to cocaine if you give
um direct injections of gdnf into
dopamine neurons you have the same
outcome it's really interesting right
so that one that you know kind of
effective IBN may be unique
so yeah so we've been running this trial
it'll come out and press and
um six eight weeks from now
um it's looking like human trials with
ibogaine yep
tell me more yeah yeah so we partnered
so it's it has been very difficult to do
this in the US historically because of
the cardiac risk so we we kind of
um constructed this study where in
Stanford IRB agreed to this study which
is amazing of them where we actually
evaluated people at Stanford sent them
down to Mexico
so they were kind of already headed to
Mexico
signed up to do this through vets then
they came to see us and they went down
to Mexico received the IBN came back
reevaluated them evaluated them in a
month so we did the first neuroimaging
study of ibogaine
um effects first EEG study of ibogain
effects blood full neurocognitive
batteries
um
and it's an interesting phenomenon
there's been about a thousand Navy Seals
and Army Rangers and Special Forces guys
that have gone down and taken this
African root Park extract
got it
you can reboot your life your health
even your career anything you want all
you need is discipline I can teach you
the tactics that I learned while growing
a billion dollar business that will
allow you to see your goals through
whether you want better health stronger
relationships a more successful career
any of that is possible with the mindset
and business programs in Impact Theory
University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started today
I began is extracted from the iboga tree
that's
native tikkaban and surrounding
um you know African countries and the
the gabonese
um group that that has kind of used this
um as a Sacrament is the buity
and they've been using this for
Millennia and so
um yeah it was kind of long story that
led up to it there's a movie that a
documentary that I was
in Premiere at Tribeca about a month ago
called of of light night
um Lucy Walker
um described you know kind of went
through and described this history of
the last kind of 50 to 60 years of
trying to get get this studied in the
U.S
um but yeah we you know it's been
there's been a difficulty in
um in studying it in the US and so we
partnered to do it those results are
kind of pending and I can talk about
that at a later date
um there's been a lot of interest
um you know kind of in the addiction
treatment community in in Kentucky
Kentucky interestingly ended up being
the first state to to have a lot of
interest in this they have money from
some of the opiate lawsuits and and
settlement money for for a lot of the
you know the um the opiate oxycodone you
know cotton codone problems they have
um you know I think like 800 million
dollars and they're trying whoa and so
they're trying to they they're trying to
earmark like um 42 million or so
um towards ibogaine
um research and so they
um proposed to do this
um so I was I was actually testifying in
Kentucky
um earlier this week uh in front of a
the opiate commission about this and so
and so they um one guy in particular
Brian Hubbard in that in the Attorney
General's office
you know put this up as like an idea for
dealing with Kentucky's opiate
um crisis and what did they want to know
is it effective in helping people get uh
unaddicted yeah that's what it's
actually been no like what it's been
more established to do and so that you
know this exploration of the veterans is
a new application and we you know we've
explored kind of those effects we've
known for some time that it's a profound
addiction interrupter of that Mouse
study I was talking about earlier like
for you know 30 years we've had case
reports but it's been very hard to study
it in the U.S because of the regulatory
concerns around the heart and because of
you know concerns of studying
psychedelics historically so we're
probably at a moment now where that
shifting but um but yeah you know uh I
think Hunter Biden in his documentary
um took ibogaine and then describes it
um there have been a number of other
celebrities and and folks like that that
um have taken ibogaine in very kind of
variable levels of Optics kind of
society you know at a societal level of
you know knowing this but their clinics
that operate in countries where this is
legal including it's legal in Australia
New Zealand but you know countries where
this is legal where people will go and
receive IBO game treatment for you know
hard to treat addiction and so and the
numbers are really really good
for addiction Interruption so it's just
been this issue of how do you how do you
deal with the heart problem you know
we've we've taken this kind of stance of
co-administration of cardiac risk
reduction drugs so you can kind of
prophylax against potential heart
problems before even ibogains on board
and then you know concurrently with the
IBN with the idea that you could you
know risk reduce and you know we didn't
observe any symptomatic cardiac problems
during our trial which is great
but yeah it's it's it's interesting you
know this is we're at this precipice of
really looking at these really
interesting substances and
ones that are really really I would say
technologically advanced compared to the
drugs that man has made when you say
they're technologically advanced what do
you mean that they're because one
question that that I have based on some
of the things you're saying is is it the
profundity of the experience from a
psychedelic or is it the glial
uh brain growth factor I forget the
exact letters
there we go
um yeah because if I can inject it right
into the site the the glial derived
neurotropic Factor if I can inject that
right into the dopamine receptor was
that it
um
sure but then that indicates that it may
not be the profundity of the experience
it's actually creating it going back to
ssris and it's not that it's building up
in your system it's that there's
potentially that it's just causing you
to
um secrete more bdnf and that's really
what's going on
um
what where does the data point that we
need to look I get there's we don't have
the conclusive anything yet but what
does the data suggest is the next thing
to look at yeah
um so the the ways that people are
trying to deal with this is by
um modifying the molecule to take off
the trip the problem with that idea is
that
it's a different drug you know I mean
everybody wants to think it's the same
drug but it's effectively a different
drug when you do that now it could be a
totally effective drug and if they
modify the molecule if they modify the
drug and then it still works just as
well without the trip then you can make
the argument that the trip isn't
necessary if it doesn't work as well
then you're it's kind of unclear right
um you know the other way to do it which
is a way that we're exploring is can you
put
drug and just in specific brain regions
without putting in other brain regions
now injecting directly after surgery and
there's all this problems with that but
there's a guy uh Rock a Ron that I'm
working with at Stanford who's developed
a tech where he can package drug into a
nanoparticle cage
so you can inject the drug sitting in
these kind of cages and then you they
just like eventually urinate it out or
whatever and you never the drug never
does anything because it's been bound
into this cage the whole time
but if you use ultrasound as a form of
stimulation because you can use a
focused form of ultrasound just like the
diagnostic ultrasound but you can focus
it to a point if you focus it to a point
I'm going to say you know area of blood
flow in the brain you know vessels
carrying the drug it will warp the cage
and let the drug out for a second but
only in the specific region of the brain
that you hit it with Wow right that is
clever yeah and and what's cool about
that is it allows you to ask the
question of
necessary and specific and all that so
we're gonna release ketamine into the
cingulate
um into a singular into the anterior
cingulate so same idea cage it up yeah
hit it when it hits this part of the
brain and see what happens yeah and
we're looking at pain changes because
pain is like
um really nicely you know measured in
the sense that you can have an acute you
know anti-pain effect
um whereas like the you know the longer
term you know depression effects or
whatever it's a little bit harder to to
kind of measure that so if we're going
to measure pain first
and then the you know so that's the
primary question can we reduce pain but
relatedly do they have any sort of you
know dissociation from the ketamine you
know and start to be able to use
you know specific drug release to do
mapping experiments and you can do that
with any psychedelic ketamine
and so is this is putting the drug in
this brain region
um sufficient to produce all the
therapeutic effects without causing the
psychological effects or do you just get
a piece of it
suggesting that you and then you put you
find you know this one contributes 30 33
this one contributes 33 this one
contributes 33 to the total
you put it in all three of those regions
if you if you do have the psychological
effect that maybe you can't divorce them
if you don't have it
um then you can you know and so that's
another way of dealing with it but it's
it's a really hard
question and it's going to take 10 years
to figure out that question I think
you know in the short term you know my
thing is pragmatics and just having
tools and all that and so just trying to
just try to test it with this with a
trip knowing that it makes it a lot
harder to
you know to scale that you know because
you have to have a lot more you know
therapeutic involvement and all of that
to be able to deal with a lot of the
content what people say with ibogaine is
that they
um they have this Life review actually
about 80 percent of people experience
um a Life review on IBN and what that is
is an autobiographical replaying of past
emotionally relevant memories some of
which aren't even really known to be
relevant they just end up being critical
moments the things you wouldn't expect
pop up yeah which makes this really
interesting and gets back to your
question about high tech and so you know
this is a drug that marches you through
all the emotionally relevant parts of
your life
you have an intuition you're seeing this
as a third party you have an intuition
of what you thought and felt at that
moment you have an intuition with the
other person or people felt or thought
of that moment you have a re-evaluation
of that total situation and then a
reconsolidation because every time you
bring up a memory you reconsolidate it
as you know and this drug for 30 hours
marches you through all of these Jesus
and at the end of it
people say they've completely
sorted you know all of that content and
they're now in a place where they've
they kind of have approached it in a
totally different way so
um with ibogaine specifically are has
anybody put words to what the the vibe
of the recontextualization is so like
MDMA it makes you feel like you love
yeah it's everyone actually but from
what I've heard I began like they say
it's it's hard it's work it's hard it's
work yeah what does that mean exactly so
no matter what sort of emotional thing
you're you're looking at it's just I no
longer feel emotionally charged about it
and so now from a neutral perspective
I'm going to reconsolidate it with a
neutral sense it's a neutral stance but
it can be very emotionally
it can be very emotion inducing because
you're not pro Tom in this whoa that's
weird right and so so I I am sort of
standing outside myself and I'm
perfectly willing to say you were an
[__] in that moment yeah so like it's
okay
but you need to recognize where to file
that appropriately yeah so your example
earlier about the note to yourself when
you're arguing with your wife on
Saturdays that that almost is kind of
the similar sort of idea right is that
in some ways you you emulated that you
were able to kind of see
that you're going to do this your wife's
gonna have this feeling and if you just
give her this note then you know and so
it's like that right it's like this idea
that that you're you're able to go into
that and you may even and I'm making
this up you know you may even go into
that and be like man I shouldn't even
have been mad about that I
you know the only reason why she's
saying any of that is because of this
other thing that I did
or you know or whatever right or some
other scenario but it's like you're able
to see that you're also able to kind of
Intuit the other person's perspective
and I mean who knows how any of this
works in a way that like they can then
their kind of reasoning is
contextualized for you and then you have
this moment for some people and why it
can be hard so you have to face the hard
reality that the way that to your point
the perception of the map of reality
that you're operating on wasn't the
territory at all
right and that the way that you are
seeing that
event go down was totally through a lens
that was
the sort of kind of perceptual
disturbances that we see the world
through
and and then operating off of that
information that was inherently flawed
right and and it seems to allow for
folks to kind of
re-evaluate all of that
and and with that establish greater
control and choice
because you're you you kind of have a
better calibration of the world like you
know this idea of the map is in the
territory like the closer your map is to
the territory the more inherent control
you have because you have a better sense
of if I walk this way there is going to
be land or there's going to be water or
whatever you know and I think for a lot
of us part of what goes wrong is my map
is off enough
to where I thought you know I was
driving my car on the road the beach or
whatever you know
you know as a metaphor right and uh and
I think that we do that all the time
with our own perceptions of what's going
on with reality and the people that
we're interacting with
and so it seems like if you at if you
hear all the anecdotes it seems like
what it does is it really gives you a
better calibration and that but that
calibration is inherently hard because
you have to face the the truth that you
were wrong
whereas I think with MDMA
it's much more to your point it's much
more of like
just a pure loving acceptance
that
your map isn't right but it's okay and
in some ways both of those are highly
useful and therapeutic right like you
you kind of have to hold both of those
that like my map is wrong and I have to
face it at some point but I also have to
love myself and accept myself for having
a miscalibrated map because it's
probably due to something that happened
in my childhood that
shifted my ability to see it or
something that happened in my whatever
like some trauma that I experienced in
my early adulthood or whatever it is you
know right like that's that's inherently
like the
the empathy the empathic
part and I think you have to have both
of those but but yeah that's definitely
what that's definitely what the IB game
seems to do is it seems to kind of write
a bunch of views and take you down a
journey and um it's it's pretty
fascinating that it ends up being these
Elite Fighters
right which in in retrospect makes total
sense why they'd be really in droves
going down there because
they're not worried about a one in 300 I
mean it's it's not really probably one
in 300 for those guys because none of
them have had a problem a thousand have
been down there but you know in theory
one in 300 risk of of death you know
they went into war zones that were a
higher risk for them than that you know
and and they see this as an exit out of
the kind of constant turmoil yeah I was
going to say that that would be my gut
instinct as to why Navy Seals and I
think it was you that I've heard speak
about this but I definitely heard
somebody speak about this you know you
can imagine a Navy SEAL they're in a
combat zone they do something it goes
wrong they accidentally kill a child or
friendly fire or whatever and now that's
a part of your mental map of who you are
as a person and that's just tearing your
guts out every day every night that's
right and to be able to go do this thing
that allows you to file it away properly
because as you were describing this the
thing that it makes me think of is
um Time Heals all wounds now what that
phrase is getting at is that when you
sleep part of the memory consolidation
process is to strip away the emotional
charge of that memory and file it away
neutrally but if for some reason you're
locked in a PTSD like cycle that doesn't
happen and so you're you're constantly
reliving that emotion with the same
level of emotional salience as when it
first happened which I cannot imagine
the hell that that would be if the worst
things that have ever happened to me or
God forbid I had done something that was
horrendous and which honestly for me
anyway would be worse and then I just
living that at the same volume every
time every time every time and so if I
begin and obviously I'm pure speculation
here but if ibogaine Works to sort of
rapidly do what time is supposed to do
which is strip that emotion away like if
if life sleep does it slowly you know
over weeks months years depending on how
intense this thing is and ibogaine does
it over 30 hours like suddenly you get
why people would be willing to go do
that difficult work the part that I
struggled to wrap my head around is
why it's tied to addiction like those
seem like two very different things I
think of maybe erroneously I think of
addiction as being a biological thing
where my body has gone I I have adjusted
all of my internal levels to expect
heroin cocaine whatever and why all of a
sudden if I don't get that oh we're good
no problem but you know a day before if
I didn't get it I was vomiting I was
shaking and sweating
well you have to think about what yusuke
Bor mate uh who's been on the show yeah
I saw that he um works a lot of addicted
individuals in Vancouver
yeah his view which is interesting and I
think it's probably right is that
there's an in there's an underlying
trauma driving you know particularly if
you think about opiates you know opiates
in this very short term
put people in the state of of reduced
pain not just physical pain but
emotional pain and going back to the
ketamine story right where like you need
an opiate agonism to have an
antidepressant effect
from ketamine right so so this idea that
you know substances actually do have a
very immediate
effect that is in the right direction
the problem with these same substances
they actually go totally in the opposite
direction and create a big problem
with chronic use
you know and so you know acute use of of
say buprenorphine which is which is a
one of the opiates it's it's the active
ingredient in Suboxone the kind of one
of the drugs that we use for for taking
people off of opiates but it's it's self
an opiate and so if you give
buprenorphine you can have an
antidepressant effect if you give
oxycodone chronically you can produce
more treatment resistant depression you
can actually make people more treatment
resistance so it works for a minute but
then it becomes a problem but then it
becomes a problem and so you know
there's a there's a pretty consistent
finding that people that have depression
before major exposure to opiates or PTSD
have a higher risk of converting to
opioid use disorder
um I had a study I tried to get knighted
a National Institute of drug abuse to
pay for
um you know four or five years ago with
our neurostimulation approach
um where we were we were saying we're
going to treat these depressed
individuals right before they go and get
a total knee total hip replacement
because it's incredibly painful and in
those people if they're depressed they
have like a 2.6 times the amount of
opiates they're using by day three whoa
compared to non-depressed people just
being depressed makes you need more
opiates yeah if you get the effect too
yeah yeah yeah right and so because
physical and emotional pain are
processed in the same part of the brain
in the singular yep that's so
interesting man Jesus yeah yeah and so I
think and then our you know our
stimulation approach is targeted into
the singular we were talking about
earlier right so you and you can
actually release endogenous opiates with
stem
so is this idea that we could
what we were talking about earlier
prophylax against
um one psychiatric condition by treating
another and so I said let's treat the
depression they go and do surgery and
then we see if we can in the active
group knock down the amount of opiates
they're using compared to the Sham group
for the goal of trying to
trying to treat the depression and
reduce the risk just like
anesthesiologists do for other things
you don't go into surgery until your
heart's skin until your vessels are good
they won't let you you know and so it's
this idea of could you do a pre-surgical
risk reduction and it gives you a model
for actually preventing a future
addiction
um
that was a seemingly too radical idea at
that time for Nida there I think it was
having a little bit of a hard time kind
of conceptualizing you know like are you
treating you're not treating addiction
you're treating depression you're
applying to night you know and so it's
where I think it gets a little bit
complicated you know that's one of those
things that really bums me up because if
it works and like I get we don't think
of them as being connected but if they
are connected then you need to address
it and so especially when you think
about how many people end up getting
addicted to opioids because they were
put on legitimate pain medication to
begin with and then it turns into an
addiction and then they can't shake it
and so uh knee surgery becomes a prison
stint for opioid addiction that's right
man that's really interesting yeah
that's right yeah yeah so it's it's an
interesting thing I mean I think we're
getting to a place now where hopefully
we can start thinking about that I mean
the ideal world is we we just don't
we we don't give somebody an opiate or
we concurrently treat them if they need
to have an opiate with something that
essentially fixes the underlying problem
that would that would cause the risk you
know profile but but yeah I mean I think
getting back to your original question
about ibogain the
the reason why it makes sense at a level
is because the gdnf thing but also the
the mouse self-administration thing I
were talking about earlier but also that
combo of that and that they're
addressing some of the pain right some
of that inherent pain from some of the
trauma that somebody like gaboramate
would talk about that probably drove
them to that place in the you know to
begin with right
um and uh because not everybody you can
give somebody Fentanyl and then never
want finale again you know some people
hate it or whatever right and so it's
this idea that you you may be people
that keep seeking it maybe tapping into
actually a system that doesn't need
fentanyl but needs something else that
fentanyl is acting on right like
neurostimulation like maybe like you
know some of these psychedelic you know
drugs maybe like ketamine whatever it is
and uh it gives us clues about what the
circuitry is and what the problem could
be the underlying initial problem could
be
um but it's also why I think we've got
to pour
a lot more money into researching these
things like we really
you've gotten very far in cancer biology
and Cancer Treatments over the last you
know 20 30 years right we can
you know we can treat previously
untreatable Cancers and we we have drugs
you know we even have ways of modifying
the immune system to attack cancer now
and you know recent Nobel Prize a couple
years ago
for somebody on that one
um
and um we know a lot about the heart but
but if you look at the federal dollars
that have gone into brain conditions
really into psychiatric conditions it's
a lot less but the but depression is the
most disabling condition worldwide
you know a lot of these things are and
so what metric
um by like you know standard disability
scores you know so you can I can't get
out of bed I can't go to work yeah I
can't think through this thing
yeah I mean and if you if you look to
like our you know our conversation an
hour ago around the cardiac thing and
you know if you if you ask a cardiac
patient just had a heart attack what's
and they're having depression what's the
worst part of what's going on it's
depression take a Parkinson's patient
with new Parkinson's and they've got all
their shaking and all this stuff and
they're depressed and you ask them
what's the worst part of your
Parkinson's it's the depression Jesus
right depression is comorbid with almost
everything maybe everything and it's
um and it makes everything that it
touches worse
right if you have depression and you
just had an uh a surgery your wound
healing is going to be a day delayed
compared to people that aren't depressed
that's banana I mean I after what you
told me about the heart I should not be
surprised but I didn't know that yeah
that's bananas so depression makes you
need more opiates it slows down your
healing and it increases your risk of
heart attack does it increase your risk
of cancer or other
um chronic diseases the cancer story has
been more inconclusive you know but
there's a list there's a recent
meta-analysis and there was a list of
risks I mean there's one paper published
in the American in the American Academy
the the green Journal neurology and um
and depression increases your risk your
depression in your 30s and 40s increases
your risk of having Parkinson's later in
life Jesus Christ right and then
Parkinson's increases your risk of
depression just like the cardiac thing
right so
depression makes literally everything
worse and produces a risk for you and so
the idea
that we're not putting like an insane
amount of federal funding into
understanding what depression is and
answering many of these great questions
that you've asked around what's causal
and what drives what and how's the gut
and the brain related and how is Diet
all that stuff needs to be understood in
a deep way probably with machine
learning and AI embedded in those
questions but
you need you need like a dense amount of
money to be able to figure out uh figure
out how to do that you know and like all
of our you know our accelerated
stimulation approach that you know
well looks like will ultimately end up
on the inpatient unit and treat
psychiatric emergencies
we had we have a lot of federal support
and a lot of federal funding now and
very thankful for that
um the original work was Grassroots
donor
funding you know and so people that had
personal looks I'm guessing obviously
but people that had personal experience
that are like you can make this as legal
as you want this is amazing yeah yeah
and so a lot of the you know a lot of
the really really early early stage
mental illness
Psychiatry kind of experimental
Therapeutics work at least that we've
done has been philanthropy funded and a
good bit of my portfolio for the lab is
from um you know private donors the with
a whole lot of means that come in and
they say you know my my kid or my parent
or my spouse or whatever is suffering
and there's just not anything for this
that's how we got in the I began work
you know that's how we got into the
accelerated stimulation work and our
like application and other indications
you know how we're getting into some of
like the direct brain recording work
it's all philanthropy funded and and you
know really where the federal agencies
come in is in that you know in many many
cases in that second
step once we have a signal to kind of
come in and expand the effect but you
know in their defense they've got a
limited budget you know so they really
need to to invest in things that are
somewhat de-risked
and if societally
we were able to put you know as much
money proportionally based off of your
question of these disability scores
so the most disabling things get the
most federal money to to kind of explore
and to do really really moonshot sorts
of things where it's really early and
fund it from the get-go then we would
know a lot more about this and so the
hope is is that
this generation of of teenagers and
folks in their early 20s seemed to
really embrace
therapy and the kind of you know having
a mental illness having a psychiatric
diagnosis having even sub syndromal
symptoms and needing a therapist and
that sort of thing
and as we like destigmatize this stuff
and approach it from a different lens
and you know in the case of psychedelics
that in and of itself gets destigmatized
I think that um we're going to make a
lot more Headway and and my prediction
is
you know and by 20 2040 probably or
something we'll be able to
have a decent amount of
um control over these illnesses will be
able to people be able to come in
then we'll you know we'll be able to to
kind of stratify them and we'll be able
to make you know decently predictive
therapeutic decisions on them and and
have a bigger part of the pie that's
responding because if you look at the
the numbers for any given oral
antidepressant working it's not very
good you know it's much less than a coin
flip you know and so being able yeah for
the standard oral antidepressants it's
it's not not great right so you end up
iterating across a bunch of different
drugs to get to a point where where
they're working you know some of these
rapid acting drugs ketamine story you
know what we're doing with
neuromodulation a lot of psychedelic
work looks better than that right and
that's why
people are willing to accept it because
um
you know
people whether it be military or
civilian government or whatever it is
you know everybody's recognized this is
such a big problem like we can't have
these preconceived notions of this is a
good or a bad thing or whatever it's
like does it work or not and if it does
let's add it to the list you know and uh
and I like that because that's the way I
think about it
this is incredible what do you think
about the fact that all of this like
when you were talking about ibogaine
specifically
you know the profundity of that it auto
happens that you will start cycling
through your memories that it it creates
a an environment that is useful that
allows people to deal with the most
traumatic things ever that it and this
part I know is hypothesis but the fact
that it can help with addiction
potentially just from going oh that
thing that you've been trying to cover
up or run away from or whatever just by
putting that in the right context in
your brain use using whatever mechanisms
the brain already has but you didn't
have access to before
um just by putting that in its right
file folder and removing the emotion
from it you no longer need heroin
cocaine whatever that it comes from a
root like that's just what what like
that is from a co-evolution perspective
I'm just like I'm sorry what like yeah
huh yeah yeah no it's it I argue exactly
what you said but with the kind of
profound neurotrophic kind of plasticity
effects probably concurrent right and
that's why I think such a high-tech sort
of idea that it marches you through all
these psychological things and it has
the kind of biology change that are
that's happening concurrently you know
my view and I've said this publicly is I
think you could give you know the major
drug companies
10 billion dollars 100 billion whatever
whatever it is and say make a drug that
works like IB game but I began in in
theory IBM never existed yeah yeah and
they they didn't have anything to work
off of
you know nobody can make nobody it's not
their fault like we we don't have the
Neuroscience to understand what this is
doing at all like why would it produce
these very characteristic
um you know you know processes and like
the that I mean about 80 the vast
majority of people
but it gets into that statement I said
earlier right is that we
we end up like evaluating Technology
based off of Moore's Law you know we use
we use computer think to evaluate
everything else you know and I think
that
I think that you you can't kind of do
that with the psychedelics you can't
use well whatever is the most
you know chronologically new has to be
the most advanced I think I think that
you have to use a different kind of
what's the most what has the most
inherent complexity
you know
um in a good way like what's kind of in
this case therapeutic complexity to
evaluate it but it's something like that
and it's um
it's hard to relay that kind of concept
because obviously we're so programmed to
get the iPhone 50 or whatever you know
we're so programmed to get the next
MacBook I mean we just don't even think
about it like we just know that the next
iPhone is better than the last one you
know and so chronological time ends up
being like you know
but I think uh I think for these these
Technologies right it's more about what
does it do and
um you know all the psychedelics at a
level but I think particularly I began
man I mean how does that even work you
know and uh and it's it's interesting so
it is very interesting is anybody
looking at experimenting directly with
um glial derived neurotrophic Factor
there's been some there was some work
with trying to do some of that for
Parkinson's back in the day uh where
actually they were doing like burholes
and like surgeries and injecting it into
into the because you can't digest it in
an oral form you know ibogaine's the
only way to kind of have those effects
which obviously that was off limits 15
years ago but have those effects without
you know essentially a direct injection
and so
um the study was inconclusive I think
the the problem probably it from my
perspective was dose right you give one
one injection of this it's not gonna
necessarily be enough to take somebody
who's
so far down the pipe for having
full-blown Parkinson's so they're
willing to do brain surgery to try to
treat it to then you know um evaluating
it it would be interesting if you could
you know use and I began like substance
you know even in Parkinson's right where
you
um you know you had something you know
maybe without all the cardiac risk or
something we had something that could
upregulate your
um you know your glue your glial
neurotrophic factor and kind of you know
ask the question of whether this could
restore you know dopamine neuron
function you know that that's where the
similarity is between Parkinson's and
addiction
is that you know both have an effect on
the dopamine system right in the case of
Parkinson's it's a direct hit and
degeneration of the Niagara which is
feeds up to a lot of the motor parts of
the dopamine system and then
um the addiction acts on the ventral
tegmental area nucleus accumbens reward
system but
yeah these are both dopamine population
dopamine are on populations and so
yeah a lot of you know an area that
needs a lot more research and a lot more
exploration to really understand it but
but there's you know there's a good
amount of basic science going on now
I'll be interested to see if I had to
guess that there may also be some amount
of like the plant compound is
so intricately evolved essentially to
have a bunch of different things
happening at the same time so that you
get the effect like I know when you look
at Ayahuasca which is multiple things
put together and how on God's green
earth someone figured out exactly how
you have to prep this plan and that plan
and put them together to get this effect
and that one sort of works with the
other you were talking earlier about you
know there's there's a place where
serotonin if you can break the cell
membrane down enough that the serotonin
can get in then it can have an impact
and so you know how much of ibogaine or
any of these other drugs if you isolate
the thing you think is doing the vast
majority of the work but maybe in
reality it's only doing 80 of the work
and that you actually do get additional
benefits from the 20 of the other you
know whatevers that come in that route
or you know the sort of prime the system
to receive it yeah that's also
interesting but man does it let you know
that nature is complex it is I mean I I
think I had a it was a quote and I'm I'm
probably I'm probably underestimating
but I think it's like 10 000 plant
species in the Amazon yeah it could be
more than that but I'm sure more yeah if
you know let's say it's ten thousand it
maybe it probably is more than that you
know the number of combinations and
iterations and their poisonous ones I
mean it's just it's hard to conceive of
exactly what you said in the case of
Ayahuasca and
and really like you almost have to have
a knowledge
right that these two things this one
thing is blocking the GI breakdown of
this other thing you know in the case of
of the reversible monominoxidase
inhibitor piece that then allows for the
the DMT to get into the brain
um but yeah it's
you know the iboga tree there's not it's
a root bark you know they have to kind
of if you watch the Ouija they're like
digging it up like there's not like a
clear
Predator I mean it's it's a very
um it's a very curious kind of
anthropological
question kind of neuroanthropological
question around like
what is going on with all that you know
and people have written about it you
know an anthropologist talked about it
but it's it's not it's not clear you
know and I think that
I I actually think there's probably some
real value
to you know investing some money and
that would probably be NSF or somebody
like that but investing some money into
really trying to understand why
humans were ever doing this to to begin
with right I mean we've
yeah I think Western culture you know
with the Mayans and with like coming
into Central and South America and just
kind of imposing in that time
Christianity all that on to
those groups and then you know kind of
ignoring a lot of those
those traditions and you know kind of
re-embracing and asking you know
if we landed on Mars or whatever it was
and saw you know an alien species doing
this we'd spend a whole lot of money
trying to figure out why they were doing
it so why don't we go in and say in a
really deep way like why were the Native
Americans doing this why were the
Central and South Americans doing this
what is the reason why they were doing
it it's probably there's probably and
it's unlikely that it's the same reason
why we habitually drink alcohol that'd
be my view
you know interesting for me they seem uh
they're the same uh obviously guessing
the same evolutionary branch
one is elevated one is a lot more fun so
when I think about
um would I rather do ibogaine or MDMA
I'd rather do MDMA no sure and
especially if a Tom you have these uh
traumatic experiences there are two ways
that I can put them away you can
confront it for 30 hours and like really
contend with it uh put it away and then
you're gonna be fine or uh you can have
a great time look at it from a place of
love and just overwhelming joy and
everything's okay also put it away and
be fine long term be like uh word I'll
take the the loved one thank you very
much and so alcohol for me anyway it
makes me feel like I'm suppressing the
urge to dance on a table but it's brutal
on my body so I almost never do it yeah
um if there were no side effects like if
if I only experienced the part when I
was drunk I I would drink like it's fun
so I get how there to me they're both
writing on the back of uh I'm gonna
modulate your neurochemistry you're
gonna go on a chemical ride is how I
think about it again it might be
circuitry but you're going to go on this
ride of these things we call emotions
are fun like you go to a movie even if
it's a sad movie or a scary movie you
like again controlled to your point you
like the controlled experience of this
so while I would not want to truly
relive the trauma there is something
about hey I'm gonna I'm gonna show you a
demon but it's in a controlled fashion
in that you can you know have people
around you touching your hand
everything's okay you know so I I think
it it makes sense to me that the the
more intense ones are gonna
um propagate nested inside of a I'll
shorten it to shamanistic tradition to
where it this is this is a ritual this
is not to be taken lightly whereas
something like alcohol is going to
propagate it's like just a fun thing
that you can do you can take it a little
bit it makes you feel a little fun or
you can really push it and then look
you're gonna suffer for a day but if
there's no way especially back in the
day for you to track that oh this has
long-term consequences that it feels as
close to cake and eating it too as
you're gonna get in fact the one that
feels even closer to your cake and
eating it too is marijuana yeah tell I
don't know if you've looked at this but
like what I think people give I'm really
gonna make people mad now I think people
get marijuana free pass I don't
understand if you're if you're taking a
drug cool trade-off I'm totally for it
like if it's worth it to you for the
trade-off just seems impossible but
when I do it I don't feel bad the next
day at all I'm just like oh cool but it
like if I so one I have noticed I don't
do it often but I do it more than I
drink and I didn't used to So for
anybody that's listened to me for a long
time
um I have done it more frequently
recently because I have noticed that it
has a tremendous impact on my enjoyment
of sex so that that has been a fun
Discovery
um but I've done both smoked and edible
again I don't do it frequently but
um
smoking I can sort of feel the problem
coming on so I have a much easier time
of not overdoing it but with Edibles
um again I'm I'm a very cautious person
so I've never been like I know some
people had really bad experiences I have
not but it did get to the point where I
was trying to watch a movie and I'm like
I can't make like even the sentences add
up so like I just watched an hour and a
half of this movie I have no idea what
happened so for something like that I
just assume like there is some knock-on
effect here you can't just play with
this stuff and not have some sort of
complication down the road
well I think the base question that I it
and you and you're kind of I think
you're you're alluding to it in a way
the base question that I have asked is
this question of
you know or even to back up a little bit
do people does everybody have an
addiction
and what I mean broadly is in a
behavioral addictions
substance addictions control addictions
you know and I'd argue that that
probably right like probably everybody
has something right whether it be like
caffeine or
control or you know repetitive behaviors
or whatever it is you know and
if everybody's it's not really an
addiction in that sense what it is is
your reward system is primed to repeat
behaviors that are reinforcing right
and so
um for some people like me you know I've
historically been like a very serious
extreme sports guy like kitesurf and big
waves and if it's not a big enough wave
it's not exciting enough how big wave
are we talking yeah like uh North Shore
of Maui and stuff yeah
okay yeah I I was a big martial artist
and fought in in Taekwondo fights you
know all over the world in my 20s and
stuff and so
you know and I'd argue that that's
really just it's just really sensation
seeking Behavior at a level right and we
all do it you know in one way or another
right and so
if that's the case
then do we do we end up sublimating
certain
rewarding behaviors
that may end up being in the extreme
you know kind of um ends addict what we
call addictions
but do we sublimate
um you know certain behaviors for some
core set of practices or behaviors or
whatever that may balance us or put us
centralize us or whatever right and so
people have argued that
for a long time like people that do yoga
argue yoga people that are hardcore
meditators argue that you know and
there's there's like a a frame that you
know if if these drugs like psilocybin
and others what the end result ends up
being is a loss of addiction because
they're not themselves addictive which
is I think the fundamental first
question
if they're not themselves addictive
and there's a loss of an addiction it
kind of It's Curious right of of
whereas
the substance you're talking about
certainly cannabis there's there's
cannabis cannabis use disorder certainly
there's a you know alcohol problem
obviously and so are those sublimations
of other
habitual behaviors that end up being
kind of culturally
embedded you know and back to the
anthropological thing why do certain
cultures
you know ceremonially you know as a
Sacrament take psychedelics and do those
cultures and we don't know enough about
this but do those cultures not have as
much in the way of alcohol problems of
nicotine problems of all that because
because maybe it's getting to that
course you know core kind of
5ht2a receptor
um that kind of core circuitry
modulation and um
you know it's it's an open question you
know it's one that we don't really have
an answer to but one we probably should
because if these are all just
idiosyncratic behaviors that humans do
with certain environments and certain
plants and
then it's then it just happens to be
idiosocratic drugs that we're using
randomly to drive behaviors down that we
don't want to have versus the other idea
which is that there's some core
thing that some cultures did and that
kept that culture in a certain domain
and then you you don't have that and
then all of a sudden other cultures have
a problem you introduce
drug a from culture a to drug B and all
of a sudden you're seeing all these kind
of vast therapeutic effects
maybe it's because drug a culture a had
its sorted culture B didn't you know and
uh and it's it's a hard it's a very hard
thing to answer but it's one that is
really interesting you know
um
that that maybe a lot of it's just
sublimation maybe drinking is just a
sublimation of an instinct to do
something else
and drugs are fascinating I want to ask
you a question you made reference to it
earlier and do you think that we have a
soul that is separate from our
physiology
you refer to it as mind
something else mind brain well I think
there's there's brain there's mind as we
think about it and there's probably self
you know
um this gets out of like a scientific
statement now this is just my personal
beliefs right and so
you know
um I think that there's this you know
and a lot of a lot of meditation
practitioners believe this there's a
there's a thought stream
that his mind
and many people
their mind and their self are fused
and they see mind and self is the same
thing
let me ignore brain for a second I can
get back to that but mind and sulfur and
so
and you kind of pointed to this earlier
you said you know once you realize that
the anxiety was just happening it was
physiological then you could kind of get
yourself away from it right and distance
yourself from it and I think what you're
doing there is you're having that kind
of theory theory of mind that your mind
and yourself aren't the same thing
and that you can see your mind do all of
this stuff
and you can be an observer of it from
self and not act on it you know but for
a fair amount of people mind and self
are totally totally fused and I think
that's really where a lot of a lot of
the problems are and then and then then
you get this other layer of brain right
brain being essentially the organ that
you know mind
um is emergent from
and probably self is emergent from too
right but but it's you know so mind
emerges from brain you can have an
insult like a stroke like we talked
about and have depression and have no
reason why you'd be depressed but you
know mind and and um
you know mind is emergent from brain
just like blood flow is emergent from
your heart and so um if your heart if
your blood isn't flowing
it's because your heart isn't pumping so
you got a structure but then you've got
this emergent property and I think that
um
I think that part of you know part of
mindfulness practices is to teach people
how to
you know in this kind of mind self
you know dichotomy to
be able to distance yourself from your
thought stream
psychedelics definitely seem to do that
I actually think that brain stimulation
can do it through the brain
because you're if you can shut down the
brain regions that are emerging the mind
then yourself is left alone in many ways
wow so you're saying the self would
still survive so there there is an
observer even as you the rest of you
sort of goes offline
I would say you go offline and say your
mind goes offline you're you're like
worrying mind or whatever it is right
and so
we had a couple people in our Saint
Charles where they got well on Tuesday
we kept treats there was zero on Tuesday
and we just kept treating them on
Thursday they came in and they said hey
the weirdest thing happened last night I
was driving home from
um you know from treatment or whatever
and um I uh I saw the beach and I just
decided to go sit on the beach I never
do that but I just decided to go sit on
the beach and then and then for like an
hour I was just like totally present in
the present moment and I read about this
in my like mindfulness course or
whatever you know they're like and I
like looked it up after and I was like I
think I had like this mindful experience
or whatever and you you know you hear
one person say that as a scientist
you're like okay that's great for you I
don't really know what that means and
you haven't and you know when you have
five or six people and you're not
telling anyone that anybody else is
telling you this and they're all coming
to you with this and it's always like
they go through euthymia like they're
totally nothing they're zeroed out on
Tuesday and we have to say euthymia yeah
like normal mood got it that's a fancy
word oh sorry you thymia I've never
heard that word yeah sorry uh they go
through like basically zeroed out
depressive symptoms and when they
Transit through it if you keep treating
them they get into these these places
and it's the minority of people like
it's only people that are
you know actually less typically less
treatment resistant it doesn't take them
the whole week to get there and then by
Thursday or Friday they're telling you
this
and and you see this post psychedelic
it's not during the Psychedelic it's the
day or two after
really clear right and it's like your
thinking mind this computer that you've
got running that's I need to go grocery
shopping I need to do this like I better
not you know do this or this is gonna
happen or whatever that's like kind of
stuck in the past future thinking kind
of goes away
and what's left is you right it's U
being able to be like Mindful and
present you know which is the way that
many of the Buddhist meditators say that
they get there too right without any of
this other stuff right but it's this
idea that you can just be
present and be here
and be able to appreciate the now
and um and really the mind is just a
tool
to like deal with the world right but
it's not it's not you like it's your
ability to
you know make money or drive your car or
do whatever you need to do to get to do
the things that you you're the self
wants to do and I think
I think that to me as like a
personal goal is a spiritual goal that
people have or whatever
um as well as potentially a scientific
goal right is important to understand
because
I've never had anybody that I've I've
observed in that space who's like I
don't like this like I don't want to
like get me out of this like being
present thing I want to go back to being
worried again or whatever everybody's
feels like they like took a weight off
and they're relieved you know like now I
don't have to deal with all that I'm
just able to like be here you know
and um you know I think that's uh
it's an interesting goal and trying to
understand what that is you know from a
physiologic perspective
would be helpful because it may be a
therapeutical you know may ultimately be
a therapeutical not just a scale saying
a person's only you know minimally
symptomatic which is the way that we
think about it now but actually like
that they they can be present you know
now does that imply to you that there is
a part of you that can't be touched
through brain damage or death
um yeah it's I mean it's a great
question we don't have tools to to to
understand it right I mean that's kind
of the fundamental
the fundamental issue of all of that
right and it's and these are these are
extremely hard experiments to do you
know but it's this question of is there
a way to to separate it because you'd
effectively have to separate it I mean I
think that you know the the kind of Base
understanding and Viewpoint that
most neuroscientists in 2023 would say
is that the you that you believe is you
is all brain emergent um
right there's nothing about you that
isn't brain emergent right and and if I
was testifying in front of Congress for
like you know and they ask you that
question I'd say you know is brain
emergent you know
um
if you ask somebody like Stan Groff one
of the you know the original
um kind of OG you know psychedelic
researchers
um his answer is I've heard him say it
is that um that the brain's more like an
antenna
right
um which is
you know very different a very different
view right
um and we don't we have no we have no
way of proving any of that or
understanding any of that right
um
what everyone wants to believe is that
that you are completely
an emergent property of this brain
there's nothing else about you that's
outside of the skull
um you know it it
and you know unless these things kind of
float up into the heavens or something
it's it's hard to conceptualize of what
happens how you take that view and then
you you kind of like converge that view
with a view of of any sort of religion
which there are neuroscientists pretty
senior ones at Stanford that are also
religious you know I haven't asked them
this question but you know it's this
question of like how do you kind of
merge those views together
so it's you know that's the base kind of
we don't know and then to your your
other point right you can knock out
brain regions and you can dramatically
change
um Behavior you can change uh
personality you can change levels of
consciousness and and so
people who knew you would then say
you're not the same person I Used to
Know
right and and so that that would argue
towards the kind of brain Centric the
soul is just an emergent property the
brain the self is just another emergent
property of the brain outside of mind or
whatever
it's hard we don't have we don't have
tools to sort it out
um
you know and it's also hard because
many of the the the mechanisms that
um
that are in place are kind of helping
that system to re to kind of
self-regulate what goes in contrast to
that is there are a number of patients
who
for instance never had a musical ability
in their life they're a terrible singer
how to play any instrument or whatever
and they get frontotemporal dementia so
they get they lost some prefrontal
cortex and they have these spontaneous
emergent Musical virtuosos
right which is how do you interpret that
because I have a strong interpretation
of that oh you do okay but you know more
about this than that yeah I mean you
know it's yeah I mean there is I I will
I'll just
I will follow that with another Finding
which is kind of interesting which if
you take somebody that's learning how to
sharpshoot
and you knock out their prefrontal
cortex you can actually make them
sharpshoot better and sometimes
that system you know
anxiety for sure but that system may be
you know having a actually fully
functional maybe having a detrimental
effect to doing things that are much
more
physical and fluid and perceptual and
not necessarily in the thinking domain
you know and as a martial artist to get
back to what I was saying earlier like
you you can't actually have a rational
thought about
being in a you know in a competitive
fighting match right you you're reacting
in much shorter periods of time right
you know so some of that kick just kick
yeah yeah yeah so some of it ends up
being like kind of remember memorized
and repetitive and instinctual and maybe
Sharp Shooting is maybe maybe in some
ways music is you know but yeah I'd love
to hear your so the way that
transcranial magnetic stimulation made
it onto my radar was
um
around the idea that I think it was a
lab in Australia would have people come
in and say uh draw me a picture of a
squirrel I can't draw just do it they
draw a picture of the squirrel and then
they would put TMS on them hit them draw
squirrel again and by knocking out a
region of their brain they could
suddenly draw three or four times better
and they're like what is happening yeah
and so my wife is is a world-class
artist she is unbelievable and so when I
watch her do her thing I realize that
she is
she is seeing information that my brain
filters out so it isn't necessarily that
she I mean obviously she's trained as
well but she her and her sister drew
some her sister's older than her they
drew something each for their grandma
and gave it to their grandma and when
they were young so like a two-year
difference is gigantic at that age and
her grandmother took the two drawings
and was like well it's no fair because
Lisa's younger assuming Lisa's drawing
was the bad one but in reality Lisa's
drawing was the good one so she's just
had an ability forever and so I remember
one time she's drawing and I'm like why
are you spending time in that part of
the drawing because she was doing it
from a photo I'm like there's nothing in
the photo that part of the photo is
completely blank and she looked at me
and she's like what and I'm like that
part of the photo is completely blank
she's like are you joking like what do
you mean and I was being sincere I'm
like that part of the photo has no
detail in it what are you doing because
I watched her spend like an hour on a
part of the photo that to me was solid
white and she was like you really don't
see detailing no I don't and so I was
like holy cow you actually see detail
and then as I really sat and looked at
it I was like
I guess kind of so my brain was just
like ah close enough those are roughly
the same right move on and so buy and
your brain has to do that right if you
were if I was looking at you going
there's this many photons bouncing off
of that part of your head like uh you're
never going to get anywhere and so your
brain is constantly saying don't pay
attention to this now the interesting
thing is that particular example
is indicative of my entire personality
so part of the reason that like my wife
will say to me all the time I wish I had
your brain because I won't hold on to
things so something could really upset
me and I'm not joking five minutes later
I'll be like oh oh yeah because I get
completely absorbed in whatever I'm
doing and I just let go now the problem
is having a memory like that can be very
frustrating because I will research the
life out of something and remember 10 of
it and I'm just like how is this
possible like I've encountered that same
idea like four times and I just can't
hang on to it and so good in some areas
bad in others but when I think about it
my brain is like not essential not
essential not essential not essential
and so it's just letting go of all that
stuff so with with TMS the thing that I
found so interesting was that oftentimes
your ability goes up not down as you
knock a region offline because I always
thought it would be a stacking like you
you have to turn something on to get
good at something versus turning
something off so I can see how I mean
look music is a little harder to explain
I won't lie but like if there are let's
say uh that my brain is saying the tonal
difference between two things is
irrelevant yeah and now I get a lesion
it's like no no those little differences
make a big deal and so now by knocking
that area out I'm suddenly able to pay
attention to those two things I could
see or even like how the left and right
hemisphere are telling each other to
shut up most of the time which is why
meditation is so interesting because as
you relax areas of your brain that
normally are offline
suddenly they're they're not telling
each other to be quiet and so they can
start talking to each other so you'll
get you'll combine really weird ideas
that I wouldn't have had when my brain
is so busy saying not essential not
essential not essential yeah
yeah that that is super intriguing to me
now for me I thought you were gonna be
like I'm a physicalist and it took us a
long time to get to the part where you
said if I was testifying that I would
say uh that it's brain derived so is
some part of you conflicted on whether
that's all brain derived I think that
it's a it's a difference between
you know what you're trained and what's
your
you know where the
you know sparse but uh available
evidences and what where one's intuition
is right you approach it with humility
yeah I think so I mean we just don't it
you know it's like everything else I
mean the big bang is a end of one event
right I mean that these are the problems
with a lot of these questions is they're
very hard to
they're very hard to answer at the end
of the day you know and I think that
um the tools that we have for answering
them aren't that great you know and so
um you know being able to have better
tools to understand the nature of the
brain the nature of the Mind the nature
of the self is the mind and the self you
know the the the meditators will say
that these are
can be fused together in people and can
be separated is that really actually a
thing is that a phenomenological thing
you're just tricking yourself into
thinking that you're just tricking
yourself it's as f look
I have strong convictions loosely held
if data came up that was like no there
really is like you are an antenna and
this is all being broadcast from the
Andromeda galaxy or heaven or whatever
okay cool I have I have no need to be
right but I also my brain just models
everything I see and it's like ah based
on what I see and know this is how I'm
going to think about it for now and
again humility is the right way to
approach things but I also think people
should be unafraid to say this is what I
think of it now so right now my opinion
is very much that it's all arising from
your brain but they're a separate
phenomena in your brain that you can
learn to tease out or you can learn like
I really think again data comes out that
proves that I'm wrong no problem but I
really think as AI comes online where
we're going to realize these are all
patterns and that I can put a monk
that's been meditating for 40 years and
be like oh looking at that pattern I
know right now he's practicing loving
kindness whatever oh looking at that
person there in a bout of anxiety over
oh interesting something to do with a
pet you know what I mean like I really
think it's going to get that good yeah
but it it may be that right these may
just be modes it could be
you know it could be something else
there's some base signal right and then
there's signal from inside or outside
you know it's probably inside you know
what we what we understand it is to be
inside you know uh Francis Crick thought
it you know it it came from something
called the clouston as being a central
kind of Rhythm generator in the brain
but you know whatever some system that's
kind of the base self system and then
anxiety is layered on top of it you know
but that's different than switching
between two modes right switching
between a mode of thinking about self
and and being anxious
um
so I I'd argue more that way right that
you've got some you've got some core
probably self-representation something
driving the networks to start going in a
direction because there has to be
something moving the system you know the
reason why I've done a lot of hypnosis
research is because
you externalize control right so you can
have a suggestion
come into your brain and then you act on
that suggestion right so you can hit
highly hypnotizable people they will
um people that get absorbed in things
they will get
um you know they they will be very
suggestible to all sorts of things that
are out of their volition
you know and I used to not I used to
think this is kind of BS like when I got
to Stanford it was you know hypnosis is
a big thing I attended David Spiegel's
course and I you know I had this
um
had this experience I'm not that suggest
you know not that hypnotizable had this
experience of doing a group hypnosis
there was a bunch of doctors in the room
right and so
I'm supposed to have my eyes closed but
I'm kind of like you know looking
watching this and I see all these guys
they tell them to put the arm up and
they're like fixed in the air and I went
up to all of them after and I was like
you know you'd like just did that to be
compliant right like no no like I had no
volition over it
I want to be hypnotizable but from what
I can tell I am
mildly hypnotizable at best
um
if you if you think about that though if
you're externalizing to some other
entity to drive Behavior
there's got to be something
driving that behavior internally that's
a representation either representation
of self or mind or some combination of
that but we just don't we don't even
know
where that originates right why would
you say that so my read of that would be
that your brain evolved to know that
data will be coming from the outside and
to do things with that data oh for sure
it's it's two different
there has to be a a source point in the
brain or a a primary Network in the
brain
that's driving that's causal you know it
to to be able to have
volition you have to have that you have
to have some some organ some circuit
however you want to think about it in
the brain that's driving it you know if
not then because nah so I may be
misunderstanding you do you say that
because you assume that we have free
will
um I say that because
well yeah I'm assuming we have a free
will yeah interesting I don't think we
have free will though the illusion is so
compelling I don't spend any time
thinking like oh I don't have free I act
as if I do but when I really stop and
think about what I know about the
universe so far I'm just like nah
probably not like this is probably all
mappable
meaning if you knew everything like
there was a theory of everything you
understand physics completely there's
nothing that's unknown or unexpected
that you could then map out how every
billiard ball will react when hit by any
other billiard ball and the amount of
friction on the table Etc et cetera and
that all of our neuronal firing and all
of that stuff is it's all trackable we
just don't have the data to be able to
track it yeah I mean absolutely I think
that's totally true it's it's more about
at the end of the day if you if what
you're saying is true then it's all just
reward reinforcement that where our
entire
experience is
you know assuming what you're saying
it's all just reward reinforcement we're
just being driven completely by
externalized stimuli being processed
this threat or pleasure or some
derivation of that welcome to my world
view
that's why I say like you're having a
biological experience understand how
this all works the great news is that as
you enter as you become aware of it what
I'll call awake in The Matrix I wish
that word wasn't getting a weird
reputation uh but as you become awake in
The Matrix you can suddenly intercept
some of these things and go oh I would
like to react now in this way I'm not
just going to be beholden to my emotions
and you really can insert a level of
awareness even if whether you get that
level of awareness is something you can
choose to do or not which I doubt but it
certainly feels like you can and so uh
becoming aware that awareness isn't
I mean I suppose you could argue that's
reward driven as well but
the sort of thing that people who are
you know serious meditators maybe some
of the Psychedelic crew you know that
that whole set of writers
you know it doesn't it doesn't map onto
the way that standard reinforcement
happens in the brain you know I think
that's really the I agree with you that
there are probably a lot of people
walking around the world that are Dr you
know kind of driven com their mind brain
their mind brain self is kind of all
fused together and they're being driven
primarily by these reward version loops
right
um
but the sort of like meditative
descriptions that people say
unless you can argue that that's all
being driven by some other way of
reinforcing reward
doesn't play on to the to this you know
more standard kind of reward story you
know can you give me uh an example
specifically of what they would say
because like and while you think of that
to all the people out there I get this
every time I bring this up they're like
as soon as you do psychedelics you're
going to realize that your world view is
just absolutely ridiculous cool fair
enough I'm very open to that data point
and and it is merely at this actually
there's two things that stop me legality
and uh I recently read a story about a
guy that did
um psilocybin for the first time and it
sent him off on like a four month or
longer like manic episode and he said it
ended up ruining his life and I was like
whoa that was sort of the first
um calming thing I was like ready to go
yeah uh and that was like oh
maybe not I don't advocate for anybody
to take psychedelics for
you know personal reasons in the in that
kind of a context if that makes sense
um is kind of as a physician I think
they're useful within a kind of
diagnostic framework
what I can tell you is the people that
do advocate for those things you know
you know that that's the sort of thing
that you hear the risk as you've aptly
pointed out is there are certain people
particularly people that are on the kind
of psychotic
um you know hypomanic bipolar Spectrum
in which psychedelics are um really
contraindicated right and all the trials
like intentionally strip out anybody
that has a threat of that although there
there is an ongoing trial interestingly
of people with an established psychotic
disorder
um diagnosis
um being explored right now which I'm
really like with psychedelics Wow and
and they've given you know schizophrenic
full-blown schizophrenic patients
Academy anything and they don't have a
worsening of their their psychotic
symptoms so uh Carol tominga down at UT
Southwestern did a lot of that work but
um yeah I mean I think that
what you hear from people if you go to
psychedelic science or you talk to
patients that receive this is
there there ends up being an
experiential stripping of these things
apart
and and that could all just be you know
a construction
right as you as you aptly point out and
that's that's why all of this is all
theoretical like there's no like what
you're saying I think is theoretical
what I the various things I'm saying are
all theoretical
your personal worldview is most aligned
with
I'd say the majority of neuroscientists
walking on Earth today right so your
view is what if we had a polling at
Society for Neuroscience what most of
those folks would would say if you
deploying at psychedelic science 2023
it'd be a majority of those folks
probably you know and so it's just one
of these things where it's hard to it's
I I don't like to kind of and the reason
why I'm not giving you a firm answer on
this and why I'm giving you a lot of
like open questions is because
I don't I don't like to
have opinions maybe to your point I
don't like to have opinions that aren't
testable
and at the current state of things
your what while you're views align with
the majority of neuroscientists
you know they're that's some of that's
probably an extrapolation from animal
studies and stuff like that which I
would argue the whole Human Experience
is beyond what animal cognition is
um
you know and then the you know the
Psychedelic crew
um or even maybe some of the hypnosis
researchers having a different viewpoint
on this is all experiential and maybe at
the end of the day to your point just
kind of self
fulfilling prophecy or self-deluding or
self or beliefs that are that are kind
of getting entangled in in World Views
around what the science is but
you know
to your point we don't have the tools to
to measure it so it's it's it in 2023 an
impossible
question to answer but an important a
very important one you know and and once
we get a handle on that if we really
if it really is that the brain
is
truly just you know
self-propagating and you kill a part of
the brain and you kill that part of the
person forever and that's just that part
of that person is dead
um or until we find ways to regenerate
the brain dead or whatever then
um you know
then it aligns with the the sort of way
you're thinking about it
um but yeah I don't I don't love I don't
love I try to bite off chunks that are
more proximal to the tech we have now
and then that allows for me to have a
real bet and then have an answer that's
yielded out of it so this idea of like
moving
hypnotizability up transiently like we
had enough science to be able to go and
say yeah we can we can do that or
being able to figure out you know you
know kind of slick ways of of cutting
you know speed of stimulation
um down to really short periods of time
and asking questions about moving brain
circuitry quickly or slowly or what's
the nature in some ways what's the
nature of the brain circuitry so we have
a study now where we scan people every
day and then we look at you know the
change in the circuitry as it relates to
the change in symptoms so does the
circuitry
change precede the behavioral change or
vice versa tells you something
inherently about you know when you know
based off what you're saying you'd
assume the circuitry has to either
change concurrently or before and then
you'd have a behavior change I actually
don't I think that there is something
where you could you can do it in either
direction and that's part of what's
utterly fascinating it's like smiling
and then feeling better or feeling
better and then smiling you can actually
go either direction
well at this it would be it would be
weird if the stimulation changed the
behavior without a brain change from
what you were saying earlier right like
you'd have to assume that the brain
changed for
for ex for a stimulation induced
experiential change to happen it's
interesting I think you have to bypass
like physics principles
um we'd oh God we didn't really open up
a can of worms there uh so I will I'll
tap out with that question hanging in
the air uh brother this has been so
fascinating I've absolutely love this
where can people follow you
so Stanford brand stimulation lab is uh
the best place to follow our work and
yeah happy to particularly have patients
come in and you know be interested in
some of the studies so amazing
boys and girls if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace if
you want to learn more about the use of
psychedelics to treat depression and I
hope you do check out this conversation
with Dan Engel ebook is a fascinating
medicine because you can have people
addicted to heroin
decades long go through one treatment